Crawling is probably the first way your baby will get moving. She may start by shuffling around on her tummy, also known as the commando crawl.

Soon your baby will learn to balance on her hands and knees. From this position she can push off with her knees to move forwards and backwards. She'll be scooting around your home in no time.
When will my baby learn to crawl?
Your baby may start learning to crawl when she's between six months and nine months old. By the time she's a year old, she's likely to be crawling well and exploring her surroundings.

Bear in mind that some babies never crawl and get around by bottom-shuffling instead. Other babies move directly to pulling up, standing, and walking. It's getting mobile that's important, not how your baby does it.
How will my baby learn to crawl?
Six months to seven months

Your baby will learn to crawl after having spent time on her tummy to strengthen her muscles. By the time she is about six months old, she will be able to do mini push-ups. She will lie on her tummy and lift her head and chest up, using her arms for support.

Your baby may then start to move around by commando-crawling, pulling herself along on her tummy using her forearms. She may then get up on all fours and rock backwards and forwards, with her arms straight and her body parallel to the floor.

Eight months to 10 months

By the time your baby is about eight months old, she may be able to sit well without support. She may then try to move from a sitting position on to her hands and knees. Her arm, leg, and back muscles should be strong enough to keep her on all fours.

Your baby will then work out that pushing off with her knees gives her just the boost she needs to get moving. At first, she may go backwards before she learns to go forwards, getting further away from the toy she has her eye on. Gradually, she'll learn to go from a crawling position back into a sitting position.

Your baby may also learn to cross-crawl to move forwards. This is where she moves one arm and the opposite leg together.

One year

Practice makes perfect and your baby is likely to be crawling confidently by the time she's a year old. She'll be keen to tackle any challenge, including the stairs.
Once my baby can crawl, what comes next?
After your baby has got used to crawling, she will work on getting upright and learning to walk. She'll begin by pulling herself up on everything she can reach, whether it's the coffee table or your leg.

Once your baby gets the hang of balancing on her legs, she'll be ready to stand on her own and cruise. Cruising is where your baby will move around in an upright position while holding on to furniture. Once your baby has mastered the art of cruising, it's just a matter of time until she's walking, running, jumping, and leaping.
How can I encourage my baby to crawl?
You can help your baby to crawl by encouraging her to spend time on her tummy. There's some evidence that babies who spend plenty of time playing on their tummies are likely to crawl earlier.

You can start putting your baby on her tummy soon after she is born. To begin with, you may like to start giving her tummy time in your arms, rather than on the floor. Try holding her in the rugby hold, where your baby lies on your forearm, face down. You could also try lying her on your chest while you recline. Start with just one minute or two minutes of tummy time to begin with and then gradually build it up.

When your baby is three months to four months old, start introducing more tummy time on the floor. Encourage her to push herself up on her arms, as this action strengthens the muscles she needs for crawling. Dangling a favourite toy above your baby is a good way of motivating her.

Once your baby has started crawling, let her crawl around the floor as much as she likes. She'll be full of energy and keen to explore. Lots of crawling is good exercise, and it may tire her out a bit before bedtime!

You can make things fun by creating an obstacle course around the living room for your baby to negotiate. Try using pillows, boxes, and sofa cushions. This will help to improve her confidence, speed, and agility. Always stay with your baby, in case she gets into difficulty.
How do I keep my crawling baby safe?
A crawling baby can get into a lot of mischief. Make sure your house is child-proofed, and put stair gates at the top and bottom of the stairs.

Your baby will be drawn to stairs like an explorer to Mount Everest, but enticing as they are, stairs can be dangerous. It's best to keep them off-limits until your baby is walking well, at about 18 months. Even then, always watch her when she's climbing the stairs.

As soon as your baby can crawl, or pull herself up to standing, take cot toys and bumpers out of her cot. Your baby may climb on to them and fall out of her cot.
Does my baby need to wear shoes?
You don't have to invest in shoes for your baby just yet. She won't need her first shoes until she's walking confidently, and going outdoors regularly.

Let your baby go barefoot around the house. Going barefoot helps to strengthen the arches of her feet and her leg muscles. It can also make it easier for your baby to balance when her shoeless feet are free to feel the different textures she's walking on.
My baby is 11 months and she's not crawling yet. Should I be worried?
Babies develop skills differently, some more quickly than others. When your baby reaches 12 months, talk to your doctor or health visitor if:

    Your baby hasn't shown an interest in getting mobile at all, even by bottom-shuffling, crawling, or rolling.
    Your baby hasn't worked out how to move her arms and legs together in a coordinated motion.
    She can't use both arms and both legs equally.


http://www.babycentre.co.uk/a6501/developmental-milestones-crawling#ixzz4CFifgiFV

