How to Blow Dry Hair

Community Q&A

Air drying may be healthy and natural, but blow drying, when done carefully and with the right techniques, has the ability to not only keep your locks dry, but also to improve their structure and style, without excess damage. If you're sick of wet patches on the back of your shirt and frantically rubbing your wet "do" with a towel, then ditch your old routine and improve your blow drying techniques today.
Ad
Steps

    Image titled Blow Dry Hair Step 1 preview
    1
    Wash your hair. Use your regular shampoo, but for better blow drying effects and |protection, try washing with a moisturizing shampoo (dry hair formula, as it's often called). This type of shampoo will provide extra moisture that will protect your hair from the effects of the blow dryer. It will also protect it from any other heat caused by straightening or curling, and generally add more moisture to your locks. You don't have to buy a super expensive brand - moisturising shampoos are available just about anywhere for all kinds of prices, so look around and secure the best deal for you.
    Image titled Blow Dry Hair Step 2 preview
    2
    Towel off your hair slightly, just enough to stop the dripping. Don't rub your hair with the towel, as the friction can cause split ends and frizzy dryness. Instead, gently wrap the towel around your hair and squeeze, like blotting the water out of your hair. If you have hair that's too short a length for that technique, wrap the towel around your head and rub very very gently using strong, circular motions. Don't rub too fast or hard, and if you can feel pain or hair breaking, then use your common sense and stop. Your hair doesn't have to be very dry at all after toweling; it just shouldn't be excessively soaked and dripping everywhere.
    Image titled Blow Dry Hair Step 3 preview
    3
    Separate your hair into sections. The bigger the section, the longer it will take to dry. It's best to go for four to six sections, but make sure that nothing is tangled. If you have thick or longer hair, try using clips to help. If your hair's a bit too short, you may want to just part it into two sections.
    Image titled Blow Dry Hair Step 4 preview
    4
    Start blow drying at the top/roots, about six inches (15cm) away from your scalp. Maintain this distance throughout, so nothing burns. Never blow dry in an upwards motion, as this causes more damage. Plus, by drying the hair on your scalp, it prevents the moisture from soaking the rest of your hair.
    Image titled Blow Dry Hair Step 5 preview
    5
    Work your way down the hair sections. Remember to move the blow dryer around, again, to avoid focusing too much heat on one area. If you simply focus the dryer on one spot for too long it will dry out and may even burn the hair, rather than drying it gently.
    Image titled Blow Dry Hair Step 6 preview
    6
    Leave your hair a little bit damp. Don't dry the hair until your whole head of hair is completely dry; leave in some moisture, so that your hair won't dry out, and become frizzy or damaged. Leave it tolerably damp, not so it soaks your clothes, but so it will dry naturally in about 5 to 10 minutes.
    Image titled Blow Dry Hair Step 7 preview
    7
    Finish with a blast of cold air. This will help to to lock in shine. Brush through your hair gently, or de-tangle it with your fingers. If needed, apply a moisturizing or anti-frizz serum and brush it through evenly. You can even use a tiny bit of olive oil for a more "natural" option. These will work to keep your locks shiny and smooth, and now, dry, all day long!
