Why do people blow candles on their birthdays?

The candle is symbolic in nature, carried on through the centuries as tradition.

There doesn't appear to be a single clear-cut origin. There are two schools of thought.

One school believes it dates back to Ancient Greece, where a single candle was used to symbolize the "glow of the moon."

The other believes it was part of a 17th century German tradition to celebrate Kinderfest (which translates from the German into "children's festival"), where the single candle represented the "light of life."  The German superstition subscribed to the belief that if you make a silent wish and blow out all the candles, your wish will come true.

In my experience as a kid, they don't really come true, but it's fun to imagine that they might...

About 200 years ago, cutting a cake during a birthday party began in Germany. As Germans were skilled at candle-making, they started putting tiny candles around the cake and a big candle, representing the light of life, in the centre.

The tradition of blowing them out also began around then, partly out of superstition and partly for fun. The birthday person is supposed to make a wish, and if blown out in a single puff, the smoke would carry the wish heavenwards, and the gods would grant the wish.


Some believe that the tradition of birthday candles began in Ancient Greece. Putting candles on a cake was a special way to pay tribute to the Greek moon goddess, Artemis. They baked round cakes to symbolize the moon. Candles were added to represent the reflected moonlight.

Many ancient cultures also believed that smoke carried their prayers to  the heavens. Today’s tradition of making wishes before blowing out your  birthday candles may have started with that belief.

An Ngram search gives us a hint that birthday cakes as a concept may have turned up in the English language at some point in the 19th century, while birthday candles as something worth specifically mentioning turns up in the 20th.

Wikipedia gives three or four theories of the origin of birthday cakes - two of these theorize an ancient origin, and two refer to German and Swiss 18th century origins. The latter actually give some textual sources, and seems the most credible. The alternate idea - that birthday cakes originated with Greek worship of Artemis sounds immediately dodgy, but it had me searching for a while. All I can find is Wiccan cookbooks and self-help type books. If there's any ancient greek source which describe this kind of ceremony, I'd love to hear about it. For now it looks like a case of the Internet listening to its own echoes :)

There are several genuine folkloric clusters of ideas floating around about celebratory cakes and candles - probably folk magic inspired by church liturgy? German nobility appears to have picked them up and adapted them to their more extravagant showpiece cakes, and from there the scene is set for commercialization and popularity with the new middle class in the 19th century.


Never thought of it before! In Indian tradition, usually blowing off candles indicate inviting darkness into the life! hence it is uaually not observed in the village part of India... City, which has imbibed the modern culture, usually blows off candles before cutting the cake!


Have never thought of it before! So haven't looked for an answer. But now, I feel it is so disgusting. When people blow off the candle on cake, and everyone then eats that cake, which most likely contains the splash. If you know what I mean.
The usual trend is to light a candle in happy moments..like Diwali, Christmas!
Don't you think birthday is a happy moment? :D
Yes it is "bit' unhygienic. How many people have you heard of that got sick from birthday cake? Very very rare right. But the tradition started long before people realized this, and it's probably too late to stop it.

Candles, being slow-burning, are believed to be symbolic of the passage of time. In fact, they were often used as timekeepers. Though the exact origin and significance of the candle blowing ritual is unknown, the history of placing candles on top of the cake is believed to be started in 1808. This tradition can be traced to Kinderfest, an 18th-century German birthday celebration for children. the tradition at the time was to place one candle on the cake for each year of the individual's life, so that the number of candles on top of the cake would represent the age which some one had reached.

Some other beliefs:
1. The tradition of placing candles on birthday cake is attributed to early Greeks, who used to place lit candles on cakes to make them glow like the moon. Greeks used to take the cake to the temple of Artemis.
2. Some say that candles were placed on the cake because people believed that the smoke of the candle carried their prayers to gods.
3. Others believe that the custom originated in Germany where people used to place a large candle in the center of the cake to symbolize ‘the light of life’.
4. People place candles on birthday cakes and a silent wish is made before blowing out the candle. It is believed that blowing out all candles in one breath means the wish will come true and the person will enjoy good luck in the coming year.


    The blowing out of the candles on the birthday cake originated from an early tradition that believed that the smoke from the candles would take one’s wish or petition up to God. 


Since you're not asking why there are candles or why they're blown out, but rather why blowing it out is done before cutting the cake, I assume you're wondering about the order. The most plausible reason would be:
It's trickier to cut a cake while the candles are still lit. You could burn yourself or drop the candle on a flammable surface. Also you generally want to blow out the candles sooner rather than later to minimize wax dripping on the cake.
 The usual trend is to light a candle in happy moments..like Diwali, Christmas!
a simple answer is that blowing of candles and those cheering after that signifies the happiness of completing another year being still alive. And preparing for the coming one so that we can light up the candles again the next yaer. :)

