How to Play Various Shots in Cricket

Four Methods:Batting BasicsHitting Front Foot ShotsHitting Back Foot ShotsPlaying Unorthodox ShotsCommunity Q&A

Playing a scoring shot in cricket can be difficult, especially when you don't know the appropriate shot to use for the circumstances. A good batsman must have good hand-eye coordination, reflexes, strength, speed, and sound judgment. In addition, a strong batsman will need a thorough knowledge of rules and a thorough understanding of cricket strategy and tactics. Learning and practicing the various shots and when to use them will go a long way to improving your game and helping you score more runs.
Method 1
Edit
Batting Basics

    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 1
    1
    Decide whether to take an attacking shot or defend the wickets. The factors that could play into your decision might be anything from how fast or well the ball is bowled, to the length and rules of the match being played. Shorter matches usually make for more attacking shots as batsman have less opportunity to score runs. Longer test matches that can go for up to five days tend result in more defensive plays.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 2
    2
    Move forward or back. Front foot shots are most often used to play a ball that is delivered between ankle and thigh height. Back foot shots are better for balls that are between the thigh and head. Once you identify the height which the ball will likely arrive, you can shift your weight to the front or back leg to play the corresponding shots.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 3
    3
    Keep your eyes on the ball. Watching the progress of the ball is important, as it will help you to determine when and where to hit it.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 4
    4
    Avoid being called out. There are several ways to be called out in cricket. When batting keep these rules in mind in determining how aggressive to be with your shots.
        Prevent the ball from hitting the wicket.
        Avoid being hit in the legs by the ball in front of the wicket. This may result in the batsman being out by leg before wicket.
        Avoid giving catches to any fielders on the field.
        Avoid edging the ball to the wicket-keeper.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 5
    5
    Hit the ball with the bat with precise placement, timing, and strength to avoid the fielders on the field. It takes a great deal of skill and practice to be a great batsman. Be patient and wait for the right shot to play.

Method 2
Edit
Hitting Front Foot Shots

    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 6
    1
    Play a forward defensive shot. Not every shot in cricket can be a scoring shot. When a ball is well bowled, use a forward defensive shot to avoid being called out. Having a solid defense is a crucial part of being a good batsman.
        Lean your head and front shoulder forward. Take a step with the front foot while keeping the back leg straight.[1]
        Swing the bat downward and contact the ball as it passes below the eyes. Keep the bat angled so the face is toward the ground.
        The bat should end up slightly ahead of your front leg and close the side of the pad. Do not follow through. Keep the heel of your back foot off the ground and hold the position to have the best chance to block the ball.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 7
    2
    Play a straight drive. This shot is usually played when a full delivery on middle or off stump. It is one of the most common shots and usually the first one learned by cricket players. Depending on the direction the ball travels, this shot can be referred to as a cover drive, off drive, straight drive, on drive, or square drive.[2]
        Lean forward and step with your front foot. Bend your front knee. This will give you a solid base for the shot.
        Your head should ahead or level with the front knee and your back foot should be up on the toe during the swing.
        Swing the bat straight and contact the ball when it is below the eyes. Keep your wrists relaxed and the bat angled to keep the drive low.
        Follow through should continue on a straight path so that the bat face is toward the sky.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 8
    3
    Play a sweep shot. This shot is great to use against spinners. When you see a low-bouncing ball on the legside, go to the sweep shot.
        Lean your head and front shoulder forward. Stride with your front foot so the pad is in the path of the ball. Drop your back knee to the ground.
        Lift the bat to a high backswing then bring the bat down and across the body. Strike the ball in front of the pad. Roll your wrists slightly when you make contact to angle the ball downward.
        Follow through. Bring your hands around after striking the ball so they end up near your front shoulder with the bat held high in the air.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 9
    4
    Play a front foot leg glance. This shot relies of the speed of the bowled ball as opposed to the power of the hitter. A front foot leg glance is best used to play balls delivered off to the leg side.
        Lean forward with your head and front shoulder. Shift your weight to your front leg.
        Bring the bat straight through. Angle the bat face slightly toward your front leg during the stroke. Make contact in front of the front leg pad.
        Flick your top wrist to glance the shot downward. This shot relies on control and precision to deflect the ball as opposed to a powerful swing.

Method 3
Edit
Hitting Back Foot Shots

    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 10
    1
    Play a back foot defense shot. When facing a fast bowler a back foot defense shot is an important element to avoid being called out. If a shot is on the stump but short of good length, this shot is a solid way to play it safe.
        Step back towards the wickets with your back foot. Keep your back leg inside the line of the ball. Keep your head forward and your back foot flat on the ground.[3]
        Move your front foot toward the back leg with your front foot pointed at the bowler.
        Keeping the arms in a high position, swing the bat straight down. Angle the bat toward the ground and strike the ball when it is below the eyes.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 11
    2
    Play a back foot leg glance. The trick to mastering this shot is all in the wrists. Use it to play balls that are delivered short or full on the leg side.
        Quickly move both legs back toward the stumps. Keep your back leg in line with the ball. Angle your body to face toward the bowler.
        Swing the bad straight through. Turn the face slightly toward your leg side and strike the ball in front of the body.
        Roll your top wrist over to control the ball and angle it toward the ground. The top hand grip can remain loose or tight depending on how fine or square the batter wants the ball to be.[4]
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 12
    3
    Play a square cut. This powerful shot can help score lots of runs. Select this shot on short deliveries that are outside of the stump.
        Step backwards and across the stump with the back foot. Begin your backswing by turning your front shoulder while bringing the bat back.
        Swing the bat down and across the body. Get your arms fully extended to generate maximum power. Roll your hands slightly to angle the ball downwards.
        Continue the
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 13
    4
    Play a back foot drive. This shot is similar to a back foot defensive. Play this shot in to a short delivery to score runs.
        Bring your front foot back as you begin your backswing.[5] Keep your weight slightly on your front leg. And keep the bat in line with the delivery of the ball.
        Keep the bat straight as you begin your swing. Use your top hand to control the swing and provide the power by pushing through with your bottom hand.
        Follow through bringing your hands high above your front shoulder.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 14
    5
    Play a hook or pull shot. The steps for these shots are identical, but a pull shot address balls delivered to the short side around the waist level, while a hook shot addresses balls delivered to the short side between chest and head height. These shots are somewhat risky as they pose the chance of being caught out. It requires great footwork and excellent hand-eye coordination.
        Step back and across with your back foot. This will open up your chest slightly toward the bowler.
        Move your front leg back and out toward the leg side. Bring your body around while keeping your eyes on the ball.
        Swing the bat across the body at a slight downward angle. Keep your arms full extended and roll the wrists on contact to help keep the ball down.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 15
    6
    The follow through can be performed one of two ways. You can lift the front leg and shift your weight to pivot on the back leg. Or you can turn both your legs to follow through the path of the ball.

Method 4
Edit
Playing Unorthodox Shots

    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 16
    1
    Hitting a reverse sweep. This is usually played against overpitched deliveries.
        Stand on a balanced back foot. Place the front foot up to the toes (padded portion) vertical or upright.
        Hold the bat horizontally close to the pitch by the phase of the bat in an opposite manner.
        Move the bat to the offside so that the ball is struck the instant it touches the ground.
    Image titled Play Various Shots in Cricket Step 17
    2
    Try a switch hit shot. This shot was made famous by Kevin Pietersen in 2008.[6] In this shot, a batsman changes his handedness and posture to adopt a stance the mirror image of his traditional handedness while the bowler is running in to bowl. As a fielding team cannot change the placing of fielders while the bowler is in his run-up, the fielding side is effectively wrong-footed with the fielders out of position. This shot's legality was confirmed by the ICC in 2008.The shot is risky because a batsman is less proficient in the other handedness and is more likely to make a mistake in the execution of his shot.

Community Q&A

    I don't know how to focus on the ball and play a shot.
    wikiHow Contributor
    Keep your head still and your eyes on the ball. Let the ball come to you and play the shot. Take an example from golf - head still, target locked, swing and gone. The more that you keep your head still, the greater the chance of you hitting the ball.
    Not Helpful 7 Helpful 74
    When batting, which hand should be gripped tightly and which should not?
    wikiHow Contributor
    For a right hand batsman, the upper hand or the left hand should be gripped tightly with right hand being the support to hold the bat. Opposite hands are used by left hand batsmen.
    Not Helpful 5 Helpful 53
    When should I play a sweep shot?
    wikiHow Contributor
    A sweep shot is usually played when the ball pitches around the leg stump and is not bouncing too much. If you find yourself in this situation, you can try playing a sweep shot.
    Not Helpful 3 Helpful 26
    How can I stay calm and avoid becoming frustrated while playing?
    wikiHow Contributor
    The first thing is to believe in yourself. Stay focused on the ball and the match situation. Take a deep breath, be positive every time and congratulate yourself on every shot that you play.
    Not Helpful 5 Helpful 29
    How can I play square cut?
    wikiHow Contributor
    The square cut is played to a ball bowled short and wide outside the off stump. Move your weight onto your back foot. Bring your bat across the line of the ball towards the offside, and increase your bat speed into contact, from a high position to lower one. Roll your wrists as you hit the ball over the ball, to keep it down.
    Not Helpful 9 Helpful 34
    Which stroke should be used for a ball coming straight to wicket?
    wikiHow Contributor
    It depends. If the ball is a yorker, play a helicopter shot. Otherwise play a straight drive.
    Not Helpful 1 Helpful 8

Unanswered Questions

    What kind of shot for a slow ball
    Answer this question Flag for removal
    How can I place the ball to perfection?
    Answer this question Flag for removal

Show more unanswered questions
Ask a Question
Submit
Edit
Video
Edit
Tips

    When you hit the ball try to hit it in the centre of the bat. This will give the most power as it is the thickest part of the cricket bat.
    Always keep your eyes on the ball. Watching the progress of the ball is important, as it will help you to determine when and where to hit it.
    Practicing every day can help you improve your shots.
    Watch some cricket on television. You can learn a lot by watching how the pros play their shots.
    If you are a beginner just practice with a tennis ball then after use a cricket ball. This will make any mistakes you make a little less painful.

