Follow these simple steps to learn how to do a proper front dive, off a three-meter springboard.
Method 1
Edit
Casual Dive

    Image titled Do a Dive Step 1
    1
    Start about four feet back from the end of the board if you're a teen or adult, or further if you take large steps. Stand in an upright position, back and legs straight.
    Image titled Do a Dive Step 2
    2
    When you're ready to do your approach, take three long steps, swinging your arms, together, in the same direction, as you walk.
    Image titled Do a Dive Step 3
    3
    When you've taken your three steps, bring one leg up and hop to the end of the board.
    Image titled Do a Dive Step 4
    4
    As you are doing this, keep your head and neck straight and looking forward.
    Image titled Do a Dive Step 5
    5
    When you've jumped to the end of the board, do a large arm circle counter-clockwise and push off the board with both feet as hard as you can.
    Image titled Do a Dive Step 6
    6
    Go all the way up and then bend at the waist. 
    Image titled Do a Dive Step 7
    7
    Bring your arms up and squeeze your ears with your arms
    Image titled Do a Dive Step 8
    8
    Clasp your hands together and look at your hands.
    Image titled Do a Dive Step 9
    9
    Keep your legs straight and toes pointed.

Method 2
Edit
Professional Racing Dive

    Image titled 43271 10
    1
    Banish fear from your mind. The fear of diving is all in your head. Diving may seem intimidating, especially if you're afraid of heights. But the fear is often only in your head.
    Image titled 43271 11
    2
    Stand on the edge of the board that's slanting down, curling your toes over the edge.
    Image titled 43271 12
    3
    Crouch down into position, with your chin tucked into your chest. Keep your arms straight down your sides.
    Image titled 43271 13
    4
    When you hear the buzzer go off, explode forward with your knees. Try not to move your head. Bring your arms up in streamline position, stretching them in a straight line past your head.
        Try not to bend your legs. Straighten them out behind you, thinking "higher" as you do.
    Image titled 43271 14
    5
    After you hit the water, streamline underwater for as long as possible. The rule of thumb is to streamline for at least five seconds, but that depends on your momentum. Try to streamline as long as possible.
    Image titled 43271 15
    6
    Begin the first stroke of your relay and go all out (your fastest speed) until you hit the wall.

Community Q&A
Ask a Question
Submit
Edit
Tips

    If at first you don't succeed, try diving from a kneeling position at first. It's the same idea, but you're not as far from the water.
    Make sure that the water isn't too shallow before you dive, so you don't get injured.
    Don't be scared. It is all very safe, as long as you push your feet and arch as you dive. Don't forget to point your feet and legs straight for a perfect Splash!
    To land a dive, try practicing first. it will take some time to perfect. So you must aim to go in as streamlined a way as possible.
    If you are aiming to jump off a diving board, then you should aim to follow the same steps - bend your knees, straight arms, head straight, but just before you "slide" into the water, extend your legs and arch your back and tuck your head in slightly.
    With kneeling dives, try not do a "somersault" when you dive in.
    Sometimes it might be easier to "fall" into the water. Remember, diving is all about having fun, so don't get miffed if you can't do it the first time!
    Once you can dive this way, try pushing off earlier and bending as you're in the air. This will let you get farther in the air and make your dives more graceful.

Edit
Warnings

    Have proper instruction and supervision if you're trying new dives.
    If you don't know how to dive, don't try flips. They take a lot of practice and you can sprain or break your neck unless you know how to do them.
    Be sure to only dive in waters where you are comfortable swimming.
    Be careful when diving from smooth surfaces, as your feet could slip.
    Don't depend on goggles when diving. They WILL slip off.
    If the no diving sign or warning is showing on the side or on the guidebook, don't try to dive.
    Try to avoid belly flops. If you do belly flop, just smile and try again! They do hurt, but as long as you keep your body under control going in, you should be fine.
    Make sure your swim shorts are tied up (for guys), they might fall off!
    Never dive off a board into water that is less than 12 feet deep. Historical standards for installing diving boards have not been sufficient, and people have broken their necks.[1]



Learning to dive is an exciting next step to take once you're comfortable jumping into a pool. Diving headfirst feels exhilarating, and since it helps you swim faster and reach further depths, it opens up a whole new side of swimming in the pool. Learning to dive can be a little nerve-wracking at first, but doing dry runs on land, practicing from a crouching position and having a spotter help you can make the process easier. See Step 1 to learn how to dive into a pool with the correct form and work your way up to advanced dives.
Part 1
Working Up to Diving

    Dive Into a Pool Step 1 Version 3.jpg

    spaceplay / pause

    escstop

    ffullscreen

    shift + ←→slower / faster (latest Chrome and Safari)

    ↑↓volume

    mmute

    ←→seek

     . seek to previous

    12…6 seek to 10%, 20%, …60%
    to Dive Into a Pool
    1
    Find a deep diving pool. Since diving means entering a pool headfirst, the water has to be deep enough so that you don't hit the bottom too quickly and risk getting a head or spine injury. The Red Cross considers nine feet to be a good depth for diving if you want to be especially cautious, but the diving area in many pools is eight feet deep. Never dive into a pool that's less than eight feet deep.[1]
        If you're unsure how deep a pool is, it's best to avoid diving there. It can be hard to gauge a pool's depth just by looking. Find a pool where the depth of the water is clearly marked. In many cases there will also be a sign posted that specifies diving is permitted there.
        Avoid diving into lakes, ponds and other natural bodies of water unless the area is supervised and has been cleared for diving. The depth of the water in these natural places is very inconsistent, and there may be boulders hiding in the water that you can't see from the shore.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 2 Version 3.jpg
    2
    Get used to the thought of diving in headfirst. Many beginner divers, especially kids, are afraid to dive at first. It makes sense, since in any other situation launching toward something headfirst would result in pain and injury. If you're nervous about taking the plunge, try these techniques to feel more comfortable with the idea:
        Jump into the water feet first, so you get used to the feeling of entering water from a height. Sometimes kids think that water is hard, so it can help to point out to them that it's soft as you encourage them to splash around.
        Practice falling while you're in the water. Stand up in the water and let yourself fall forward, then let yourself fall backward. See how the water "catches" you and prevents you from getting hurt.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 3 Version 3.jpg
    3
    Do a dry run on land before diving into water. Since diving can be intimidating when you're a beginner, it helps to practice on land and visualize how the dive will go before you enter the water. Stand upright with your arms straight above your head, your upper arms hugging your ears. Keep your hands flat and place one palm over the other. Tuck in your chin. This is the way your upper body should be composed when you dive into the water.
        You can practice the motion of diving on land as well. Find a grassy area or practice indoors on soft carpet. Get down on one knee and angle your arms and fingertips toward the ground. Roll forward so that your hands touch the ground, followed by your arms. Keep going until you're flat on your belly.
        Remember to hold your hands flat and place one on top of the other, rather than clasping them. Tucking your chin into your chest is equally important. These actions help to streamline your body, making your entry into the water smoother.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 4 Version 3.jpg
    4
    Crouch close to the pool and glide into the water. Stand with your toes slightly over the edge of the pool, and crouch down close. Put your arms in position over your head - remember to tuck in that chin! - and point your hands toward the water. Now rock your body forward and gently glide into the water headfirst. As your legs follow your upper body, straighten them out and point your toes.
        As you enter the water, exhale, then hold your breath. You might accidentally inhale underwater if you feel startled, but once you get the hang of diving it'll feel natural to hold your breath.
        Practice diving from a crouch until you feel completely comfortable entering the water this way. Once it starts to feel easy and you're ready to move on, you can dive from a standing position.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 5 Version 2.jpg

    spaceplay / pause

    escstop

    ffullscreen

    shift + ←→slower / faster (latest Chrome and Safari)

    ↑↓volume

    mmute

    ←→seek

     . seek to previous

    12…6 seek to 10%, 20%, …60%
    to Dive Into a Pool
    5
    Dive from a standing position. When you're ready to try it standing up, edge close to the pool so that your toes are at the edge. Get your arms and hands in position and bend at the waist, pointing your fingers toward the water. Tuck in your chin, then tilt forward into the water. As your legs follow your upper body, keep them together and point your toes.
        Consider having a spotter help you the first few times. The act of diving from a standing position can be a little intimidating, and it might help to know that someone else is there to help you. Have the person stand next to you and place one hand on your belly and the other on your back, so that he or she can guide you into the water.
        Once you can dive from a standing position without needing a spotter, you're ready to advance to learning a proper dive using the correct form. Soon you'll be leaping into the water without a second thought!

Part 2
Diving With Good Form

    Dive Into a Pool Step 6 Version 2.jpg
    1
    Place your lead foot over the rim of the pool. If you're right-handed, your lead foot will be your right foot, and if you're left-handed it will be your left foot. Place your lead foot slightly in front of your back foot, so your toes slightly jut over the pool. Your back foot should be flat on the ground, with your weight balanced equally over your feet. This is the starting position for a dive.
        As you work on your diving form, try to start with your feet in the exact same place every time. If you dive off of a diving board you may want to mark the spot where your feet should go to help you practice.
        Once you're comfortable diving from a stationary position, you can work up to doing a walking or running dive. This involves taking three or five steps forward, then leaping off of your lead foot into your dive.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 7 Version 2.jpg
    2
    Point your arms above your head. Just as you did when you first practiced on land, raise your arms above your head, with your elbows straight. Tuck your upper arms against your ears. Hold your hands flat, with one palm resting over the back of your other hand. Hold your arms and hands in this position until you're ready to dive.
        As always, remember to keep your chin tucked down to your chest.
        If you do a walking or running dive, you'll start with your arms at your side, but they should always end up in an upright position before you enter the water.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 8 Version 2.jpg
    3
    Push off and dive into the pool. Rather than tipping forward and falling in, push off with your lead foot to add distance to your dive. Enter the water fingertips first. Keep your body straight as you dive, with your legs together and your toes pointed. Once your body is fully in the water, you can start swimming or immediately come up for air.
        Remember to exhale as you enter the water and hold your breath while you're in. You should be able to swim around for several seconds before needing to surface.
        Try walking or running into your dive if you want to dive further and faster. No matter how you start your dive, your body should always enter the water at the same angle and using the same basic form.

Part 3
Trying Advanced Dives

    Dive Into a Pool Step 9 Version 2.jpg
    1
    Dive off of a starting block. In competitive swimming, races begin with a dive off of a starting block, raised slightly above the surface of the pool. To dive from this position, you start in a crouch, gripping the edge of the block with both your fingers and your toes. When the starting bell or shot sounds, you spring into a low dive and start swimming the moment you hit the water.
        When you're diving off of a starting block, it's important to streamline your body so that you enter the water with as little splashing as possible. Keep your body in a straight line and point your toes. This will minimize the water's drag on your body so you won't lose precious seconds during the race.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 10 Version 2.jpg
    2
    Dive from the high board. When you've gotten comfortable from diving from the side of the pool, you might want to try it from a diving board. Diving off the low board isn't too different from the side of the pool, but the high board is a different story. It's usually about 10 feet (3.0 m) above the water, and requires climbing a ladder to get to the top.
        Make sure the high dive is above very deep water, since you'll be entering the water faster. The water should be at least 12 feet (3.7 m) deep to be on the safe side.
        You can use the same basic diving form to dive off the high dive as you'd use any other time. The key is to enter the water at an angle that gives you a smooth entry. If you lay out too flat, you'll end up doing a painful belly flop.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 11 Version 2.jpg
    3
    Learn to hurdle off a diving board. This is the proper term for starting a dive from a walk or run. You take three to five steps, followed by a one-legged jump before entering the water. Hurdling is done before any type of advanced dive that requires gaining height in order to move or contort your body before you actually enter the water. To hurdle, do the following:
        Start at the back of the diving board and take three to five steps. Three will give you plenty of momentum for a good hurdle, but you can take five if you have shorter legs or feel more comfortable taking more steps.
        On the last step, you should be near the end of the diving board. Lunge and jump, swinging your arms upward at the same time. Don't jump off the diving board; jump straight into the air.
        Land on the diving board with your feet in position to dive and your arms over your head. Now you're ready to jump off of the diving board and execute your dive.
    Dive Into a Pool Step 12 Version 2.jpg
    4
    Do a jackknife. This advanced dive looks elegant and is a good next step once you've mastered the basic dive. Your body will rise up from the board, fold forward at the hips, then straighten into a dive. To do a jackknife, follow these steps:[2]
        Begins with a hurdle. Take three to five steps, lunge and jump, and land on the edge of the board with your arms over your head. Jump off and slightly away from the diving board.
        Raise your hips above shoulder level as you jump off the board.
        Reach your arms down toward your toes. Your body should look like and upside-down V.
        Straighten your body to complete the dive.

