

One important penalty in field hockey is the penalty flick. After learning how to push the ball, you may wish to add an extra dimension to your shot repertoire by introducing a lifted shot at goal. With practice, the flick can evolve into other skills such as overheads, jinks and the highly desirable drag flick!
Steps

    Flick in Field Hockey Step 1.jpg
    1
    Hold the stick as you would for a push, your left hand at the top of the stick in an inverted 'V' grip, and your right hand at the bottom of the grip or at where the grip and stick meet. (which ever is comfortable for you.)
    Flick in Field Hockey Step 2.jpg
    2
    Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart, your left shoulder pointing in the direction you want to flick in. Bend your knees slightly and keep your back straight. You can also stand with your feet together. Step with your left foot and lean with your right.
    Flick in Field Hockey Step 3.jpg
    3
    Position the ball in the middle of your stance at a stick's reach from your body. The ball should be further out from your body than for a push.
    Flick in Field Hockey Step 4.jpg
    4
    Begin by placing the stick behind the ball and transferring your weight to your back foot. Drop the right shoulder and open up the stick face by rotating the stick with your left wrist to the right.
    Flick in Field Hockey Step 5.jpg
    5
    Roll the ball forward on your stick to start the shot. Transfer your weight to the front foot as you push the ball in a straight line into the air. Follow through smoothly by wrapping the stick around and below the left shoulder.
    Flick in Field Hockey Step 6.jpg
    6
    As you become more proficient at flicking, aim to keep the ball on the stick for longer to flick it higher. You can also control the direction of the flick, opening up the stick face early to flick right, or twisting the stick to the left to throw the ball left.

Tips

    You may need to take a big step to get enough power behind your shot. Use the strength in your legs more if you're getting only a little piddling shot.
    To flick on Astro Turf, you need to modify the technique. Get the stick down lower and further under the ball so the ball is on the stick when you begin to flick it into the air.
    Like in most sports, keep your eye on the ball even though it's on the ground. Don't look at where it needs to go, look at where it is.
    Flicking is all in the wrists. The wrists need to rotate the stick enough in order so the stick face is angled to throw the ball into the air, but not so far that the ball will slip over the head while performing the push action.
    To practice flicking, stand 5 meters (16.4 ft) from a chair or another object of similar height and aim to clear the top of it. Move further away to develop distance or closer to practice obtaining greater initial elevation in your flick. Once you are confident in your ability, stand at the top of the D and aim to clear the top of the goal.

Warnings

    Any raised shot above knee height that is not aimed at goal and is dangerous to another player will be penalized. Make sure when you do flick the ball that it is only at the goalkeeper.
    Watch where your stick swings! Keep your stick below shoulder height in the follow through to avoid hitting other players in the head and attracting a penalty.

