
Floor (gymnastics)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Brazilian gymnast Jade Barbosa about to perform a pirouette turn during her floor routine at the 2007 Pan American Games.

In gymnastics, the floor refers to a specially prepared exercise surface, which is considered an apparatus. It is used by both male and female gymnasts. The event in gymnastics performed on floor is called floor exercise. The English abbreviation for the event in gymnastics scoring is FX.

A spring floor is used in most competitive gymnastics to provide bounce. Spring floors are also used sometimes in cheerleading. The spring floor used for indoor athletics however, is designed to reduce bounce.

Contents

    1 The apparatus
        1.1 Dimensions
    2 WAG scoring and rules
        2.1 International level routines
    3 MAG scoring and rules
        3.1 International level routines
    4 See also
    5 References
    6 External links

The apparatus

The apparatus originated as a 'free exercise' for men, very similar to the floor exercise of today.[1] It wasn't until 1948 that women were allowed to compete on the floor.[1]

Most competitive gymnastics floors are spring floors. They contain springs and/or a rubber foam and plywood combination which make the floor bouncy, soften the impact of landings and enable the gymnast to gain height when tumbling.[2][3] Floors have clearly designated perimeters—the "out of bounds" area is always indicated by a border of white tape or a differently colored mat.[2][3]

The allowed time for a floor exercise is up to 70 seconds for males[4] and up to 90 seconds for females.[5] Unlike men, women always perform routines to music.[5]
Dimensions

Measurements of the apparatus are published by the Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique (FIG) in the Apparatus Norms brochure. The dimensions are the same for male and female competitors.

    Performance area: 1,200 centimetres (39 ft) x 1,200 centimetres (39 ft) ± 3 centimetres (1.2 in)[2][3]
    Diagonals: 1,697 centimetres (55.68 ft) ±5 centimetres (2.0 in)[2][3]
    Border: 100 centimetres (3.3 ft)[2][3]
    Safety zone: 200 centimetres (6.6 ft)[2][3]

WAG scoring and rules

Floor exercise routines last up to 90 seconds.[5] The routine is choreographed in advance, and is composed of acrobatic and dance elements. This event, above all others, allows the gymnast to express her personality through her dance and musical style. The moves that are choreographed in the routine must be precise, in sync with the music and entertaining.[6]

At the international elite level of competition, the composition of the routine is decided by the gymnast and her coaches. Many gymnasiums and national federations hire special choreographers to design routines for their gymnasts. Well known gymnastics choreographers include Lisa Luke (United States), Adriana Pop (Romania, France, China), Nancy Roche (United States) and Geza Pozar (Romania, United States). Others opt to choreograph their FX routines in-house. Some gymnasts adopt a new FX every year; others keep the same routine for several competitive seasons. It is not uncommon for coaches to modify a routine's composition between meets, especially if it is used for an extended length of time. It is uncommon for gymnasts to use more than one different FX routine in the same season but it is not entirely unheard of: at the 1996 Olympics, for instance, Russian Dina Kotchetkova's routine in the FX event finals had completely different music, choreography and composition than that of her all-around exercise.

The music used for the routine is also the choice of the gymnast and her coaches. It may be of any known musical style and played with any instrument(s), however, it may not include spoken words or sung lyrics of any kind. Vocalization is allowed if the voice is purely done as an instrument.[5] It is the responsibility of the coach to bring the music to every competition on CD.[5]

Scores are based on difficulty, artistry, demonstration of required elements and overall performance quality. Deductions are taken for poor form and execution, lack of required elements, and falls.[7] The gymnast is expected to use the entire floor area for her routine, and to tumble from one corner of the mat to the other. Steps outside the designated perimeters of the floor incur deductions.[5] The gymnast will also incur a deduction if there are lyrics in the music.[5]
International level routines

For detailed information on score tabulation, please see the Code of Points article

Routines can include up to four tumbling lines, and several dance elements, turns and leaps. A floor routine must consist of at least:[8]

    connection of two dance elements (one must be a 180 degree split)
    saltos forward/sideways and backward
    double saltos
    saltos with a minimum of one full twist
    D+ dismount

MAG scoring and rules

A floor exercise for men is made up of mostly acrobatic elements, combined with other gymnastic elements of strength and balance, flexibility, and handstands. The routine must be choreographed forming a harmonious rhythmic exercise using the whole floor area. The whole routine may last no longer than 70 seconds.[4]

As with other gymnastic events, scores are based on difficulty, form, and overall performance quality. Deductions are taken for lack of flexibility, not using the whole floor area, pausing before tumbling lines, and using the same diagonal more than twice.[9] Handstand elements must display control and show the gymnast's intent clearly.[9]
International level routines

A floor routine should contain at least one element from all element groups:[10]

    I. Non-acrobatic elements
    II. Acrobatic elements forward
    III. Acrobatic elements backwards
    IV. Acrobatical elements sideways, backward jumps with ½ turn to salto forward, and backwards jumps with a quarter turn and a side flip (side sami)

The dismount can come from any element group other than group I.
See also

    Acro dance, which incorporates many FX elements in a dance context.
    Gym floor cover
    Performance surface
    Sprung floor
    Wushu (sport), which also uses a floor.

    Artistic gymnastics apparatusFloors





Gymnastics is a very graceful sport. Here is the step-by-step instructions for doing a nice level 5 floor routine. Have fun!
Steps

    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 1 Version 3.jpg
    1
    Salute to the judges!
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 2 Version 3.jpg
    2
    Smile big while you are doing your routine, let everyone know you're here to have fun!
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 3 Version 3.jpg
    3
    Point your toes and stay tight throughout the routine.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 4 Version 3.jpg
    4
    Start out in second position, with your arms down by your side and hands curved, almost like holding something.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 5 Version 3.jpg
    5
    Move your right arm up sideways, down.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 6.jpg
    6
    Move your left arm up forward, down.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 7.jpg
    7
    Put hands on your hips kick left foot out, then, put it over your right leg, then, turn.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 8.jpg
    8
    Put arms up look at them then down diagonal at your sides
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 9.jpg
    9
    Fold arms. Jump to the side, then, front.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 10.jpg
    10
    Straddle jump with arms out.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 11.jpg
    11
    Stick left hand and left foot out, foot pointed on ground, arm at horizontal.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 12.jpg
    12
    Turn halfway, stick right hand and right foot out, same as above.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 13.jpg
    13
    Put your feet together, run about 3 steps, dive roll, and finish.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 14.jpg
    14
    From your finish, chasse to right, bring arms up and step back, bringing arms to horizontal, hands laced. Finish.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 15.jpg
    15
    Run, front handspring, rebound, finish.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 16.jpg
    16
    Bring arms back and around back up to top; while doing this, take two steps going down and two steps coming back up.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 17.jpg
    17
    Finish, curved run, 180 degree split leap, side hop.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 18.jpg
    18
    Slide to floor, bringing right arm as if you were going to play a guitar.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 19.jpg
    19
    You should be on a sitting pike position. Turn over to seal stretch, come up to knees, slide to floor split.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 20.jpg
    20
    Bring right arm to a bow, turn to the right, kneel, stand, finish.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 21.jpg
    21
    Bring arms out, prance on left foot, then right. Bring arms into you, then back out while rocking forward, and back.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 22.jpg
    22
    Put feet together and roll back to back-extension roll to handstand, finish.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 23.jpg
    23
    Step, kick, step, step curtsy, turn to left, arms out, then kneel.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 24.jpg
    24
    Stand up, step, prepare, full turn, finish.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 25.jpg
    25
    Hitch-kick step to right foot, kink left up and turn to scale.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 26.jpg
    26
    Back walkover, finish.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 27.jpg
    27
    Step together, round off back handspring, back handspring, rebound, stick, finish. Step back with left foot, do optional pose with right foot pointed to ground.
    Do a Level 5 Gymnastics Floor Routine Step 28.jpg
    28
    Salute again to the judges! Walk off proudly, do not run, it looks sloppy.

Tips

    Stay flexible, stretch splits both ways, and middles. These will help you leaps and jumps.
    Stay hydrated!
    Before doing any gymnastics, make sure you warm up and stretch your muscles. If you don't, you could injure yourself.
    Be sure you have muscle to back you up on when tumbling. Do a lot of conditioning, but don't overdo it.

Warnings

    Do not try any gymnastics stunts without supervision.
    Make sure to always stretch before you pull a muscle
    Make sure you have trained everything correctly before risking hurting yourself.
    Gymnastics is a painful sport. Make sure you go to the gym frequently to stay in shape to prevent injuries.

