

Do you want to know how to catch a Frisbee near-perfectly? Do you ever provide a negative answer when you are asked if you want to play Frisbee in fear of humiliation? Do you want to fine tune your Frisbee catching? If you answered yes to all or any of those questions, or you just are reading for fun, this article is for you!
Steps

    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 1 Version 2.jpg
    1
    Don't be afraid of the disk. It's only a plastic toy, not a meteor hurtling towards you at the speed of light (it just seems that way). Closing your eyes will only make it more difficult to catch.
    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 2 Version 2.jpg
    2
    Get someone to throw you a Frisbee or aerobie. This is vital unless you have some kind of machine that throws flying disks.
    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 3 Version 2.jpg
    3
    Find an open area where nothing can be broken or stuck in trees. This is not entirely vital, if you and your partner(s) are careful. Windows, cars and trees are the most common hazards.
    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 4 Version 2.jpg
    4
    Have the disk thrown in your general direction.
    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 5 Version 2.jpg
    5
    Now is the climax! When the Frisbee (or aerobie) is in the air, move side to side with the movement of the disk. Do not go forward...yet.
    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 6 Version 2.jpg
    6
    When the disk is 1-2.5 feet (0.3-0.7 meters) in front of you, catch it. It is instinct usually. The basic idea is to close your hands around the disk the right time and not close your eyes. If the disc is an aerobie then the easiest way to catch it is too stick you arm in the large center hole. For Frisbee the easiest way to catch is the alligator method. Take both hands and clamp them around the disc like an alligator.
        For a one-handed catch: Keep your thumb pointing up if the disk is coming in below your waist. If the disk is coming in high, keep your thumb pointing down. Use whichever position feels most natural for in-between heights. Squeeze your fingers and thumb tightly together to grab the disk just before it smacks into your palm.
    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 7 Version 2.jpg
    7
    If the disk starts to fall early, do not run diagonally at it! Run straight. If it rises at the last second, it is easier to stop when going straight than diagonally
    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 8 Version 2.jpg
    8
    If it goes too far, jump or run back and jump. Not hard.
    Make a Perfect Frisbee Catch Step 9 Version 2.jpg
    9
    Be happy inside you caught it!

Tips

    Ask a pro or veteran to give you a better idea.
    Go to YouTube or Google Video and search "Frisbee catching" or something among those lines.

Warnings

    Disks can hurt if they hit you, so be alert!
    If you break/damage something or get it stuck and it is someone else's disk, you are liable!

