Learning the Stages of the Arm Stroke

    Swim Freestyle Correctly Step 1.jpg
    1
    Perfect your hand placement and entry. To begin your stroke, your hands should be relaxed and your fingers should be held together. Put your hand into the water fingers first about 15 inches above your head. Your palm should be tilted at a 45 degree angle facing out so your index and middle finger enter the water first. Your wrist should be tilted down and positioned above the fingers, and your elbow will be raised above the wrist. Your hand should make as little splash as possible during entry. Once your hand is in the water, extend your arm another 4 inches[1][2]
        Once your hand is in the water, press your hand down and out with your fingers spread out slightly. This is called “getting a feel” for the water or “the catch”.
        If you want to work on your hand technique, you can wear hand paddles to help you concentrate on how your hands are entering and exiting the water.
        Avoid putting your hand into the water just above your head. It will slow you down and hurt your technique.
        Do not smack the water with your arms, instead, once your hand enters the water, follow the motion and glide your arm into the water.
    Swim Freestyle Step 2 Version 4.jpg

    spaceplay / pause

    escstop

    ffullscreen

    shift + ←→slower / faster (latest Chrome and Safari)

    ↑↓volume

    mmute

    ←→seek

     . seek to previous

    12…6 seek to 10%, 20%, …60%
    to Swim Freestyle
    2
    Work on your downsweep. Your arm will act as a lever during this phase of the stroke. As you stroke, your body will rotate toward the arm that is in the motion of stroking. Move your forearm and hand downward and back with your elbow held at about a 45 degree angle. Your elbow should stay stay high in the water during this phase of your stroke. Concentrate on going through the downsweep smoothly.
        This phase should happen in a rapid motion. However, avoid trying to go faster during this phase because it won’t propel you forward much but could create drag.
    Swim Freestyle Step 3 Version 4.jpg
    3
    Pull your hand and forearm toward the center of your body for the insweep. During this part of the stroke, use your hand like a paddle and move as much water as possible. This is where you start to move your body forward with your arm stroke movement. It is the first part of the “propulsive” phase. And your upper arm will move inward toward your chest and ribcage. Your elbow will go starting moving into a 90 degree angle. When your hand starts to approach the midpoint of your body, you have reached the backsweep.[3]
        Keep your arms closer to being under you instead of stroking at your sides.
    Swim Freestyle Step 4 Version 4.jpg
    4
    Push your arm in an up, out, and backward motion to backsweep. This is the second “propulsive” phase where you can gain speed in your stroke. Right as your hand gets to the midpoint of your body you will stop pulling and start pushing water. Keep pushing water out and up until your arm hits the line of your thigh. This part of the stroke will be the most rapid phase and can be the most powerful at propelling you forward.
    Swim Freestyle Correctly Step 5.jpg
    5
    Move your elbow out of the water until it is pointing up for the release. During the release your arm doesn’t move you forward, but it does provide support for the arm which is pulling underwater. It is important to work on your release technique so that your hand entry is clean. To end your stroke, launch your hand forward in line with your shoulder out of the water. Your fingers should hang loosely above the water and your hand should swing wider than your arm. Your arm should be relaxed and should swing wide, too.[4]
        Concentrate on rotating your arm forward, and do not force a down rotation at the end of the release.

Method 2
Kicking and Rotating

    Swim Freestyle Step 6 Version 4.jpg
    1
    Flutter kick just below the surface of the water. Although kicking accounts for only 10-15% of the power in your stroke, it is still an important part of your freestyle technique. Keep your hips close to the surface of the water and make a series of quick kicks. You want to focus on minimizing drag while you propel yourself forward; therefore, your kicking range of motion should be narrow. Your legs should not kick out of the water and neither should they break below the line of your body.
        Kick from the hips and thighs. Do not kick from your knees, this is called a bicycle kick, and it will cause more drag. You may slightly bend your knees while you kick, but this should not be where your power is coming from. [5]
    Swim Freestyle Correctly Step 7.jpg
    2
    Use the two-beat kick. The two-beat kick requires less power and is used by long distance and middle distance swimmers. You kick one leg per stroke cycle. One stroke cycle means the stroke of one arm. Kick one leg in conjunction with the insweep of the opposite arm. (The insweep is when the arm starts pulling water toward the midsection of the body.) If you can think about how your arms and legs sync while you are walking, how your arm moves forward at the same time as the opposite leg, you can imagine how your kicking should be synced with your arm stroke in a similar way.[6][7][8]
        The six-beat kick requires that you kick three times per arm stroke cycle. The third beat of the kicking cycle will start during the recovery phase. This is a faster kick that is used by faster swimmers.
    Swim Freestyle Correctly Step 8.jpg
    3
    Point your toes while you kick. If your toes aren’t pointed while you kick then there will be extra drag caused by your exposed forefoot. Your toes should face inward, and your big toes should come close to touching as you kick. When you point your toes, you are exercising the flexibility in your ankles. If you are having difficulty with ankle flexibility, consider using mid-length flippers to practice your kick.
        You can focus on both your freestyle arm and leg techniques more easily with the extra propulsion that flippers provide. But only use your flippers to help train your feet during drills.[9]
    Swim Freestyle Step 9 Version 4.jpg
    4
    Rotate your body in line with your arm stroke. Rotating your body correctly will help you with many important aspects of your stroke. First, you can put more power into your arm stroke. Second, you will minimize drag. And third, it will enable your to breathe correctly. As you rotate your body left and right with your alternating arm strokes, your body should be moving in the water about 30 degrees from the surface on both sides. Remember to swim mostly on your stomach and not on your side.[10]
        Rotate your body forward as well. Your arm and shoulders should extend forward and your body should rotate forward after your hand and arm have entered the water.
        Your fully extended shoulder should stay tucked near your cheek. Do not move your shoulder further away from your body, or this will cause drag.
        Focus on rotating your body from the hips and not from the shoulders.

Method 3
Breathing and Practice Drills

    Swim Freestyle Step 10 Version 4.jpg
    1
    Rotate your body to the surface, and inhale through your mouth. This will allow you to keep your neck muscles and your head relaxed. If you turn just your head, you can put unnecessary stress on your neck. Keep your forehead and the crown of your head slightly submerged while you breathe. Imagine you have a wine glass balanced on the side of your head that you cannot spill.[11]
        Do not over rotate. You only want tilt your body 30 degrees in one direction or the other.
        Do not hold your breath longer than you need to when you swim. Breathe at every stroke if you feel the need.
        Do not lift your head up- this will cause your hips and legs to fall, and you will have to work to regain your balance.
        Continue to keep your body and arms outstretched while you breathe. Keep your body straight, and do not lose your extension while you breathe.
    Swim Freestyle Step 11 Version 4.jpg
    2
    Blow bubbles out of your mouth and nose to expel your breath. If you hold your breath, you may develop feelings of anxiety while you are swimming that will slow you down and distract you. You can practice blowing out bubbles in shallow water. Exhale 70% through your mouth and 30% through your nose. And exhale the last 20% with more force. [12] Submerge your face and sigh or hum through your nose or mouth to create a stream of bubbles.[13]
        While underwater, make sure to exhale out all of the air so that you are not having to exhale any last bit of air when you should be inhaling.
    Swim Freestyle Correctly Step 12.jpg
    3
    Hold your forehead just under the water while you swim. The water should rest between your hairline and your eyebrows. Keep your neck and upper-back muscles relaxed while you swim. Your head should be cocked about 45 degrees forward. If you move your head down too much toward your chest, it will cause more resistance.
    Swim Freestyle Step 13 Version 4.jpg
    4
    Practice your stroke and breathing techniques. Work on isolated parts of your stroke and breathing techniques through practice drills on land and in the water. Concentrating on different parts of your stroke that you need work on will help you develop a stronger complete stroke.
        Practice your arm stroke, body rotation and head position on land. Bend forward at your waist, and go through the five stages of the arm stroke: entry, downsweep, insweep, backsweep, release. Practice rotating your body correctly, and practice keeping your head still at the side when you breathe. Rotate your shoulders to work on a longer stroke. Over exaggerate the rotation while you practice, and it will help create muscle memory for when you swim.
        Do breathing drills. Kick off the wall and keep your right arm extended in front of you. Use your left arm to stroke, and on your second stroke, take a breath on your left side. Practice blowing bubbles out of your mouth and nose completely and inhaling a full breath through your mouth. Then alternate sides and do the same drill on your right side. This will help you become comfortable with your inhaling and exhaling techniques and establish a breathing pattern. Concentrate on only rotating enough for you to get a full breath.
        Practice kicking drills. Push off the wall with your feet and extend your hands and arms out in front of you. Keeping your head under water, kick vigorously for as long as your breath will last. You do not want to focus on going fast, instead, try to focus on your technique. Keep your toes pointed, your feet pointed inward so your toes are almost touching, your hips up, and your kick high. Keep your legs relaxed, and kick from your thighs. [14] Repeat this drill 3-4 times.
    Swim Freestyle Correctly Step 14.jpg
    5
    Wear goggles while you are swimming. You do not have to wear goggles to swim freestyle; however, when you have to close your eyes while you swim, it can make you anxious. And it will make it more difficult to concentrate on your stroke. When you wear goggles, it can help you stay balanced and oriented. You will know when to stop because you will be able to see the walls of the pool, and you won’t have to worry about bumping into other swimmers.
        Adjust your strap, pulling the straps until the goggles fit on your face firmly and comfortably.
        Adjust the nose bridge. Pull on both sides of the strap if the nose bridge is a strap. The nose bridge fits properly if you press your goggles up to your eyes and they suction to your eyes without a problem.
        Fit the goggles to your head by putting the eye cups up to your eyes so that they suction to your face, and then with your thumbs, move the strap behind your head so that your goggles are firmly in place.

Technique

The starting position for front crawl is known as the "streamline" position. The swimmer starts on the stomach with both arms stretched out to the front and both legs extended to the back.
Arm movement

The arm movements of the front crawl provide most of the forward motion. The arms alternate from side to side, so while one arm is pulling and pushing under the water, the other arm is recovering above the water. The move can be separated into four parts: the downsweep, the insweep, the upsweep, and the recovery.[9] Each complete arm movement is referred to as a stroke; one stroke with each arm forms a stroke cycle.[10]

From the initial position, the arm sinks slightly lower and the palm of the hand turns 45 degrees with the thumb side of the palm towards the bottom, to catch the water and prepare for the pull. The pull movement follows a semicircle, with the elbow higher than the hand, and the hand pointing towards the body center and downward. The semicircle ends in front of the chest at the beginning of the ribcage.

The push pushes the palm backward through the water underneath the body at the beginning and at the side of the body at the end of the push.

This pull and push is also known as the S-curve.

Some time after the beginning of the pull, the other arm begins its recovery. The recovery moves the elbow in a semicircle in a vertical plane in the swimming direction. The lower arm and the hand are completely relaxed and hang down from the elbow close to the water surface and close to the swimmer's body. The beginning of the recovery looks similar to pulling the hand out of the back pocket of a pair of pants, with the small finger upwards. Further into the recovery phase, the hand movement has been compared to pulling up a center zip on a wetsuit. The recovering hand moves forward, with the fingers trailing downward, just above the surface of the water. In the middle of the recovery one shoulder is rotated forward into the air while the other is pointing backwards to avoid drag due to the large frontal area which at this specific time is not covered by the arm. To rotate the shoulder, some twist their torso while others also rotate everything down to their feet.

Beginners often make the mistake of not relaxing the arm during the recovery and of moving the hand too high and too far away from the body, in some cases even higher than the elbow. In these cases, drag and incidental muscle effort is increased at the expense of speed. Beginners often forget to use their shoulders to let the hand enter as far forward as possible. Some say the hand should enter the water thumb first, reducing drag through possible turbulence, others say the middle finger is first with the hand precisely bent down, giving thrust right from the start. At the beginning of the pull, the hand acts like a wing and is moved slower than the swimmer while at the end it acts like an oar and is moved faster than the swimmer.
Leg movement

There are several kicks that can be used with the upper body action of the front crawl. Because the front crawl is most commonly used in freestyle competitions, all of these kicks are legal.

The most usual leg movement with the front crawl is called the flutter kick.[9] The legs move alternately, with one leg kicking downward while the other leg moves upward. While the legs provide only a small part of the overall speed, they are important to stabilize the body position. This lack of balance is apparent when using a pull buoy to neutralize the leg action.

The leg in the initial position bends very slightly at the knees, and then kicks the lower leg and the foot downwards similar to kicking a football. The legs may be bent inward (or occasionally outward) slightly. After the kick, the straight leg moves back up. A frequent mistake of beginners is to bend the legs too much or to kick too much out of the water.

Ideally, there are 6 kicks per cycle (the stroke so performed is called the American crawl), although it is also possible to use 8, 4, or even 2 kicks; Franziska van Almsick, for example, swam very successfully with 4 kicks per cycle. When one arm is pushed down, the opposite leg needs to do a downward kick also, to fix the body orientation, because this happens shortly after the body rotation.
Breathing

Normally, the face is in the water during front crawl with eyes looking at the lower part of the wall in front of the pool, with the waterline between the brow line and the hairline. Breaths are taken through the mouth by turning the head to the side of a recovering arm at the beginning of the recovery, and breathing in the triangle between the upper arm, lower arm, and the waterline. The swimmer's forward movement will cause a bow wave with a trough in the water surface near the ears. After turning the head, a breath can be taken in this trough without the need to move the mouth above the average water surface. A thin film of water running down the head can be blown away just before the intake. The head is rotated back at the end of the recovery and points down and forward again when the recovered hand enters the water. The swimmer breathes out through mouth and nose until the next breath. Breathing out through the nose may help to prevent water from entering the nose. Swimmers with allergies exacerbated by time in the pool should not expect exhaling through the nose to completely prevent intranasal irritation.

Standard swimming calls for one breath every third arm recovery or every 1.5 cycles, alternating the sides for breathing. Some swimmers instead take a breath every cycle, i.e., every second arm recovery, breathing always to the same side. Most competition swimmers will breathe every other stroke, or once a cycle, to a preferred side. However some swimmers can breathe comfortably to both sides. Sprinters will often breathe a predetermined number of times in an entire race. Elite sprinters will breathe once or even no times during a fifty-metre race[citation needed]. For a one hundred metre race sprinters will often breathe every four strokes, once every two cycles, or will start with every four strokes and finish with every two strokes. In water polo and water rescue, the head is often kept out of the water completely for better visibility and easier breathing, at the price of a much steeper body position and higher drag.
Body movement

The body rotates about its long axis with every arm stroke so that the shoulder of the recovering arm is higher than the shoulder of the pushing/pulling arm. This makes the recovery much easier and reduces the need to turn the head to breathe. As one shoulder is out of the water, it reduces drag, and as it falls it aids the arm catching the water; as the other shoulder rises it aids the arm at end of the push to leave the water.

Side-to-side movement is kept to a minimum: one of the main functions of the leg kick is to maintain the line of the body.

