

Hammers are basic tools but hammers are also notorious for causing thumb and finger injuries. It is estimated that some 50,000 Americans seek treatment every year as a result of a hammer injury. Here are some tips for using a hammer properly so that both you and the project you’re working on are kept safe from harm.
Steps

    Use a Hammer Safely Step 1 Version 3.jpg
    1
    There are different types of hammers for different projects, including:
        Claw hammer. This is suitable for pounding in nails; the claw part is suitable for pulling nails out. This hammer is more commonly used for woodworking and has a “T” shape, with the head on one side and a “claw” on the other side. It is in the house. See image above.
        Ball peen hammer (hardened). This is suitable for driving a chisel or a punch. This is more commonly used for metalworking and has no claw. It has a rounded metallic head.
        Mallet. This is also often referred to as a rubber hammer. It is a fairly common type of hammer. It is suitable for delicate work as it has a softer head than most hammers.
        Upholstery hammer. This is suitable for upholstery projects; one end is usually magnetic to help with tacks used in furniture.
        Blocking Hammer" used for auto body work; not suitable for driving nails
    Use a Hammer Safely Step 2 Version 3.jpg
    2
    Check the hammer before use. Look for firm attachment of the head to the handle. Also check for splinters, loose wrapping, or other defects in the handle. If the hammer has any defects or is wobbly, do not use it. Not only will it require more energy to use but it is an accident waiting to happen.
    Use a Hammer Safely Step 3 Version 3.jpg

    Get a firm grip on the handle. This will ensure that you don’t lose your hold on the hammer and have it flying out of your hand.
    Use a Hammer Safely Step 4 Version 3.jpg

    Hold the hammer at the end of the handle. Beginners are often more comfortable holding the hammer handle midway. It is more energy efficient to grip the handle firmly at the end, but hold it a bit higher up while you are learning if that feels most comfortable and secure for you. With practice, you will become more proficient at holding the hammer towards the end, affording yourself more leverage.
    Use a Hammer Safely Step 5 Version 3.jpg
    5
    Hit your surface squarely with the hammer. Avoid banging a hammer sideways. Hit only with the head of the hammer and do not use the handle or the side of the hammer.
    Use a Hammer Safely Step 6 Version 3.jpg

    Use your whole arm and elbow. As well as maintaining a good grip, it is important to rely on the strength of your whole arm and elbow and not just rely on your wrist and hand to pound the hammer with. Most importantly, keep a straight wrist and allow the weight of the hammer itself to do the pounding, not your arm.
    Use a Hammer Safely Step 7 Version 3.jpg
    7
    Place your work against a hard surface. Do not try to do hammering work on carpet or other soft surfaces, since it requires more energy.
    Use a Hammer Safely Step 8 Version 3.jpg
    8
    Work in a natural position. Beginners, children and the less proficient should hammer at waist height for the greatest ease. If you cannot move your work, keep your position as neutral and as natural as you can.
    Use a Hammer Safely Step 9 Version 3.jpg


    Check before you swing. Keep your workspace clear of other objects and check that nobody is standing behind you or too near you when you use the hammer. You need plenty of space to swing the hammer without catching your arm or the hammer on another person or object.


    Practice. Good hammering technique comes from trial and error. You will develop your own technique over time that feels the most comfortable and works best for your projects.

Video
Tips

    To avoid marring a surface while hammering something into place (not a nail) hold a piece of scrap wood against the object and pound on that.
    If the nail is small, and so difficult to hold without hitting your fingers with the hammer, push the nail through a piece of card (stiff paper, etc) and use that to hold the nail. In this way your fingers are not near the hammer.
    Hammer handles come in many materials, including wood, fiberglass and steel. Wood and fiberglass are the best options for most people, as they are lightweight, pleasant to hold, and are less jarring on the user's arm.
    Some hammers are ergonomically designed with rubber grips. If you have problems gripping a handle properly, try ergonomic grips.
    Wear eye and, if necessary, ear protection. The materials you work with can splinter easily and cause injury, so it is a good idea to wear safety glasses when using a hammer. Wear ear protection for jobs requiring constant or extended hammering or your ears may ring afterward.
    To soften the blow of hammer used on wooden joints on a piece of furniture, it is a good idea to cut open a tennis ball using an X-shaped slit and attach it to the head. This turns the hammer into a temporary soft-headed mallet.[1]

Warnings

    Never use the handle of a hammer to pound things. It is the weakest part of the hammer and it may split if wooden, or it may come loose from the head, causing the steel head to fly off and hit someone.
    Always supervise the use of hammers with young children. Children should always wear safety glasses to protect their eyesight from flying nails or splinters.
    The hammer is for hammering. Don’t be tempted to stretch its uses. It should not be used as a lever to wedge things apart, nor should it be used as something to rest things on while the glue/paint etc. dries. Any pressure may cause the joint between the handle and head to weaken. You won’t notice any subtle weakening caused by such pressure but over time, this treatment of the tool can lead to it breaking unexpectedly during use.
    Never use your hammer to strike another large piece of steel, such as an axe or another hammer's head. Nails are fine because they are small but anything larger might cause splinters to shave off and these may fly about and injure you or somebody nearby.
    Do not use a hammer that has chips or brittleness in its head. These are forms of weakness that may cause the head to split or splinter.
    Do not self-repair a cracked hammer handle with tape or binding. Purchase a new handle and ensure it is properly affixed to the head. If you cannot do this by yourself, have it done professionally or buy a new hammer.

