

A scalp massage releases tension in the forehead and scalp areas, stimulating mental function. It is also a great way to help the circulation to your scalp and can serve as one part of a total nutrition and hair care regime to keeping your hair in good shape. Giving yourself a scalp massage is easy and something you can do to relieve tension anywhere – sitting at the desk at work, sitting in a traffic jam, when watching TV, or preferably, when relaxing somewhere pleasant.
Method 1
Hands only method

The beauty of this massage is that it can be done anywhere without the need for anything other than your fingers.

    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 1.jpg
    1
    Sit down somewhere comfortable. The less distractions, the better so that you can concentrate on what is happening. However, there's no harm squeezing this into the ads of a favorite show provided you press the mute button!
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 2.jpg
    2
    Place the fingers of both hands on your forehead. They should meet one another at an imaginary center line of your forehead. Rest the thumbs on your temples; they will provide support.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 3.jpg
    3
    Apply pressure. Make the pressure firm but light, as you press, then release.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 4.jpg
    4
    Shift your fingers slightly further up your forehead nearer to the hairline and raise your thumbs with them. Repeat the press and release movement.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 5.jpg
    5
    Keep moving this position up and onto the scalp, bit by bit, repeating the pressure/release movement. Follow the line of the Governor Vessel meridian (see "Tips"); approximately the center of your scalp.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 6.jpg
    6
    At the top of your head, apply pressure to your head at the acupoint Governor Vessel 20. This is located about three quarters of the way on the top of your scalp.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 7.jpg
    7
    Move down the back of your scalp now. Release the pressure from the acupoint Governor Vessel 20 and continue pressing down the center of your scalp line. As before, continue moving the fingers down in the same position, while moving the support thumbs down at the same time.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 8.jpg
    8
    Once you have reached the the base of your skull, return to the front. This time, position your hands about half an inch (1.27cm) either side of the mid-line of your head (in other words, this time your fingers won't be meeting but have a gap either side of the imaginary line across your forehead).
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 9.jpg
    9
    Do the press and release movement as before in this new position, moving up and then down the scalp as before.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 10.jpg
    10
    Return and repeat. This time, make the gap between your fingers and the center line of your head 1 inch (2.5cm) either side. Your fingers should now be almost on the sides of your head.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 11.jpg
    11
    Again, do the press and release movement in this new position.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 12.jpg
    12
    When you feel adept at this massage, synchronize it with your breathing, inhaling and exhaling as you press and release. This will help to calm you as well as allowing you to focus on the releasing tension to leave your scalp feeling refreshed.

Method 2
Oil method

This massage can be done in the bath, in the shower, or sitting somewhere comfortably. All you need is some essential oil, carrier oil, and hair-washing items.

    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 13.jpg
    1
    Pick an essential oil that is good for your hair type. For example, if you have dandruff, use tea-tree or lavender. Use peppermint oil or rosemary oil if you are experiencing hair loss. If your hair is overly dry, use rose oil or chamomile oil.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 14.jpg
    2
    Prepare the scalp massage oil. Add the drops of essential oil to a massage oil medium (carrier oil); suitable massage oil mediums are almond oil or olive oil. For every tablespoon of the oil that you are using, only add a maximum of two drops essential oil.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 15.jpg
    3
    Brush your hair to prepare it. Brush your hair while tilting your head upside-down to improve circulation.
        If you have long hair, start at the ends of the hair to prevent breakage.
        103308 REV 15B2.jpg
        Big paddle brushes are best for long hair; while natural bristle brushes are best for all hair types.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 16.jpg
    4
    Put a small amount of the prepared massage oil onto your fingers. Begin massaging in small circular motions near your temples, then move your fingers out over the rest of your scalp. Slowly, add more oil to the tips of your fingers when you need it.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 17.jpg
    5
    After all the oil is used up, place a warmed towel on your head and leave the oil on for approximately 10 minutes.
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 18.jpg
    6
    Wash out the oil with a good shampoo and conditioner. If your hair is very dry, you can leave the oil in for a whole night and wash in the morning. While shampooing, you might have to wash twice to get the greasiness out; massage the shampoo in well (a second massage in disguise).
    Give Yourself a Scalp Massage Step 19.jpg
    7
    Do this regularly, about once a week. It will reduce tension and may increase hair health along with a nutritious diet (which is the best way to improve your hair's health) and good styling.

Tips

    A good scalp massage can ward off or minimize a headache.
    When rinsing your hair, after all the oil has come off, quickly pour some cold water over your head to stimulate circulation.
    The Governor Vessel meridian is not visible to the naked eye; it is derived from an Oriental based theory of energy points and can be measured electrically. In Chinese, meridians are known as "Qi" or in Japanese as "Ki", often called "vital energy" in the English language. This particular meridian is thought to supply and unite the energy within all twelve meridians.[1]
    If you're under 18, you should ask for parent's permission before using any oil.
    Using ALMOST ANY kind of oil is good for your hair, (such as coconut oil, olive oil, etc) and can probably help it grow to 2-4 inches. Just be sure to not wash your hair everyday.

Warnings

    Be sure that the essential oils do not trigger any allergic reactions; know your triggers and the property of the oils before using them.
    Don't massage your scalp too roughly.You can make strands of your hair break and fall out from the rough treatment.
    As nice as cinnamon oil smells, stay away from using it on your scalp. It will burn if you accidentally get it in your eyes while you are rinsing.

