

Hula hooping is not only a great workout for your abs, but it's a great way to have fun and impress your friends. To be an expert hula hooper, all you need is to practice and to improve your coordination. If you want to know how to hula hoop, just follow these easy steps and you'll be able to do it in no time.
Method 1
Hula Hooping for Beginners

    Hula Hoop Step 1 Version 3.jpg
    1
    Put on athletic clothing. Wear a tight-fitting shirt and pants so it'll be easier to hula hoop and so the hoop won't get caught on any loose clothing.
        Comfortable shoes will also make it easier for you to hula hoop. They don't have to be athletic shoes, and the choice of even wearing shoes at all, is optional. It will neither influence nor harm your attempt to hula hoop.
        Avoid wearing any bracelets or any dangling jewelry that can get caught in the hula hoop.
    Hula Hoop Step 2 Version 3.jpg
    2
    Put the hula hoop on the ground. Choose a hoop that reaches your chest or waist when you stand it on its side. Larger hoops are ideal for beginners because they spin more slowly, which gives you more time to adjust to the rhythm of the hoop.
        If you're really committed to hula hooping, you can try hoops of a variety of weight and size to see what works best for you.
    Hula Hoop Step 3 Version 3.jpg
    3
    Step inside the hoop.
    Hula Hoop Step 4 Version 3.jpg
    4
    Reach down and grab the edges of the hoop. Place your hands apart at a comfortable distance.
    Hula Hoop Step 5 Version 3.jpg
    5
    Bring the hula hoop up to your waist level. Step one foot in front of the other to gain balance.
    Hula Hoop Step 6 Version 3.jpg
    6
    Grip the hoop firmly with two hands. Relax the hoop against one side of your torso.
    Hula Hoop Step 7 Version 4.jpg
    7
    Spin the hoop. If you're a righty, firmly spin the hoop counter-clockwise. If you're a lefty, spin it clockwise.
    Hula Hoop Step 8 Version 3.jpg
    8
    Start to move your waist in a circular motion. Push your stomach forward as the hoop moves across your stomach. Push the hoop back when it moves across your back. Or you can rotate your waist in small circles and when the hoop touches your left hit your waist towards the left side and when the hoop touches your right hit towards the right.
        Eventually you will find a perfect motion for pumping your torso.
    Hula Hoop Step 9 Version 3.jpg
    9
    Continue spinning the hoop. Keep moving your waist in a circular motion as you let go and aim to get the hoop to wrap itself around your waist like a barber's pole, round and round and round.
        If the hoop falls below your waist or even falls to the ground, pick it up and try again.
        When the hoop falls, try spinning it in the other direction. Though righties prefer to spin the hoop counter-clockwise and lefties prefer to spin it clockwise, you should still find the direction that works best for you. The direction you prefer is called your "first direction" or your "in-flow."[1]
    Hula Hoop Step 10 Version 2.jpg
    10
    Expect the hoop to fall the first few tries as you get used to the motion. Just pick up the hoop again and keep going. It is as much about getting the feeling for the motion as it is about following instructions.
        Once you become more experienced as a hula-hooper, you can discover some tricks for recovering a falling hoop.
    Hula Hoop Intro Version 2.jpg
    11
    Have fun!

Method 2
Advanced Hula Hooping

    Hula Hoop Step 11 Version 2.jpg
    1
    Learn how to recover a falling hoop. If you feel like you're getting the hang of it and you don't want to keep picking up the hoop from the ground, you can also learn to recover the hoop when it's about to fall. This will make you look more like a pro and can let you spin the hoop for much longer. Here are a few things to try if the hoop falls below your waist:
        Bend your knees below the hoop while pushing your hips really fast to get the hoop to move back up to your waist.
        Turn your body in the direction of the flow of the hoop while pushing your hips really fast.
        Move your body much quicker than normal to recover the position of the hoop.
    Hula Hoop Step 12.jpg
    2
    Master some more hula hooping skills. As you become more experienced as a hula hooper, you can add to your hula hooping repertoire by trying some new skills. Here's what you can do:
        Practice moving faster. You can do this by shifting the weight between your feel more quickly, or by pumping your torso back and forth more quickly.
        Move around as you hula hoop. To do this, turn your body in the direction that the hoop is moving. Shuffle your feet in the right direction.
        Try the "booty bump". Instead of moving the hula hoop around your waist, try moving it along your butt.
        Try moving the hoop up and down your body. An experienced hula hooper can make the hoop move above or below his waist while still recovering it.
        If you really want to kick it up a notch, you can try spinning the hoop around your head or your arms, or even around just one of your legs. Lighter hoops work better for this trick.

Video
Tips

    Hula hooping is more of a rocking motion than moving your hips in circles.
    Hula hooping is a great way to spice up a traditional abdominal workout. If you're tired of doing sit-ups, try hula hooping instead.
    If the hula hoop is going below your waist, then bump it up with your hips very quickly.
    Larger hula hoops will spin slower and be easier to use. For a person who is 5'8", at 3.5'-4' diameter is recommended. Heavier hula hoops will also be easier to use, but they shouldn't be so heavy that you have trouble keeping them up.
    If you are having trouble with moving your waist properly, move your legs further apart and plant them, bend them, and focus on one foot, moving one leg in little circles starting with your hip. This will help moving the waist at the right rhythm.

