

The javelin toss, a popular track and field sport in the Olympic games as well as in high school and college, involves hurling a metal-tipped spear as far as possible. Throwing the javelin correctly involves a mastery of technique and requires strength and stability. Note that these instructions assume a right-handed thrower; switch right and left for a left-hander. If you want to know how to throw a javelin, see Step 1 to get started.
Steps

    Throw a Javelin Step 1 Version 5.jpg
    1
    Grip the pole correctly. To hold the javelin properly, you have to place it in the fold of your hand, with your palm up, so that it's in line with the direction that you'll be throwing in. It has to lie along the length of your palm instead of across from it. You have to hold the javelin at the back of the cord, which is the grip placed around the center of gravity of the pole. One finger needs to be placed beyond the edge of the binding. Just make sure to keep your fist nice and relaxed, not tensed. Beyond that, there are three main grips that you can choose from. Here they are:
        The American grip: For this grip, you have to place your thumb and the first two joints of your index finger behind the cord. Think of it like wrapping your hand around the pole normally, except that your index finger is extended a bit more, apart from the other fingers.
        The Finnish grip: For this grip, you have to place your thumb and the first two joints of your index finger behind the cord, while the index finger supports the shaft of the pole. This is like the American grip, except that the index finger is extended further away, and the middle finger is a bit removed from the ring and pinkie fingers.
        The "V" grip: For this grip, you should hold the javelin between your index and middle fingers, behind the cord. Think of it like making a peace sign and then placing it below the pole.
    Throw a Javelin Step 2 Version 5.jpg
    2
    Begin the "Start and Carry." During this phase, relax the muscles of the right shoulder, arm and wrist, while simultaneously allowing for an easy running action. Here's what you do:
        Begin with the right foot pushed forward.
        Lift the javelin high, over your right shoulder.
        Point the right elbow slightly forward, while keeping your bicep parallel to the ground.
        Turn the right palm toward the sky, creating a natural platform for the javelin to rest upon.
        Aim the javelin in the direction you're going to run and keep the metal tip down just a bit.
        Make sure your hips are facing forward when you run, perpendicular to the throwing line.
    Throw a Javelin Step 3 Version 5.jpg
    3
    Take the "Approach Run." After you've practiced this a while, the approach run can take 13 to 17 steps. The run-up is shorter for inexperienced throwers. For a true athletic competition, the runway should be between 36.50m and 30m (120 ft.- 98.5 ft), marked by two parallel lines that are 50mm wide and 4m apart (1.5 feet and 13 ft.) Here's what you need to know as you get ready to take your approach run:
        Keep your hips high and run on the balls of your feet.
        Let your free arm swing more across the body.
        Flex the arm carrying the javelin to fix its position.
    Throw a Javelin Step 4 Version 5.jpg
    4
    Perform the "Withdrawal." This phase begins with the right foot and lasts about two strides. It's important to make sure that this movement doesn't harm your momentum.
        When you're ready for the withdrawal, speed a little bit ahead of the javelin instead of pushing your shoulders and the javelin backward (try to relax your arm and shoulder, allowing javelin to reach the point of full arm extension and fully rotated shoulder).
        Keep your head facing the way you're throwing.
        Keep your hips at right angles to the running direction.
        Shift your right leg forward and up to help keep hips in proper position.
    Throw a Javelin Step 5 Version 5.jpg
    5
    Make the "Transition." This is also known as the "cross-over". This is where you achieve the javelin tosser's "lean-back" by putting your right foot ahead of the center of gravity.
        Keep the right foot close to the ground.
        Let the right heel touch the ground.
        As the right foot moves forward, move the left foot up and lean your trunk at a 115-degree angle backward. This phase is finished when the right foot is on the ground and the left leg is forward and elevated.
    Throw a Javelin Step 6 Version 5.jpg
    6
    Do the "Pre-Delivery Stride." Move the left leg forward and align the shoulders and hips with the throwing direction.
        Wait for the left foot to touch the ground.
        Straighten the torso.
        Turn the face toward direction of the throw. The javelin and shoulders should be parallel.
        Position the throwing hand above shoulder level.
    Throw a Javelin Step 7 Version 5.jpg
    7
    Perform the "Delivery." Throw the javelin when your arm is up as high as possible. Once the left foot hits the ground, your left side must be ready to handle the thrusting of the right leg, which drives up and forward and brings the hips into a right angle with the throw. You should plant that left heel and push off with your right.
        After the hip thrust, pull back with left arm keeping it parallel to right shoulder; this will assist with right shoulder and chest moving forward and aligned with the hips, as this is taking place continue through with the throwing arm with the elbow leading.
        Move the throwing shoulder over the left leg. Your hand should follow through (the entire shoulder, elbow, and hand should move through similar to a bullwhip acting as one but building on each section before it).
        Lift the left leg and move the throwing arm, with the elbow placed high and close to the mid line. The javelin release angle should account for aerodynamic lift and drag. Experts recommend 33 degrees as the optimum angle.
        When your arm reaches the top of its arc, let go of the javelin. Your arm should be over your head, in front of you, not behind your back, when you release the javelin.
    Throw a Javelin Step 8 Version 4.jpg
    8
    Move into "Recovery." You have to make sure to follow through after you throw the javelin, allowing your throwing arm to travel diagonally across your body. If you're throwing with your right hand, the hand should end up in front of your left side. The left foot is on the ground. The right leg passes it and then stops you. How quickly you stop depends on how much momentum you built during the run-up. Usually, it can take as much as seven feet (2.1 meters).
        You should end up standing on your right foot, with your left leg up behind you. Your right shoulder will turn left, with your chest facing to the left.
        People who throw the javelin on a professional level sometimes even fall forward due to the extreme momentum they build up from throwing the javelin and following through.
    Throw a Javelin Step 9 Version 4.jpg
    9
    Keep practicing. If you want to become an expert at throwing the javelin, or just to place in a track meet at your high school, then you've got to keep at it. Training for the javelin means more than just throwing over and over again, which can actually hurt your arm and shoulder; you'll also have to commit to a strength training routine that will build muscle, giving you even more power to throw the javelin as farther than ever.
        Remember that it's not the strongest or biggest people on the field who can throw the javelin the farthest. It's the people with the best technique. That said, building up your strength can only help you.

Video
Tips

    Always make sure the elbow on your throwing arm is above your shoulder(also keep javelin between your head and elbow, i.e.you could "blow out" your elbow if javelin gets too far outside). By letting your elbow down low when throwing, you will find your javelin will land tail end first.
    Try to throw at an angle of 35 degrees. Because it covers more distance.
    Try to picture a tight wire at the above stated angle that passes through the tip and tail of the javelin and attaches to a point in the sky. You want to impart all your power along that wire. This will result in the smoothest release and longer throws.
    If you suspect that the javelin might hit someone in the field, call out to them so you can avoid an accident.

Warnings

    Don't let people stand to your side or along angles in front of the path of your throw. Keep any onlookers behind you. This is because you might accidentally send them to a + e, we don't want that!!!

