

Do you want a sexy body? Do you want all the ladies? Men? Jumping jacks are a basic structural workout that almost everyone has done as a child. What most people don’t know is how beneficial jumping jacks can be to their heart and lungs. Whether man or woman, young or old, physically fit or just beginning an exercise regimen, jumping jacks are a great, calisthenic foundation for whatever you have in store next. The record for consecutive jumping jacks in a row is 27,000;[citation needed] if you follow these instructions...you probably still won’t even get close to that.
Steps

    Perform Jumping Jacks Step 1.jpg
    1
    Begin stretching muscles of legs and arms. (i.e. hamstrings, quadriceps, glutes, calves, shoulders, back, triceps, biceps.) Stretching is very important in this exercise to avoid injury.
    Perform Jumping Jacks Step 2.jpg
    2
    Assume an erect position, with feet together and arms at your side.
    Perform Jumping Jacks Step 3.jpg
    3
    Slightly bend your knees, and propel yourself a few inches into the air.
    Perform Jumping Jacks Step 4.jpg
    4
    While in air, bring your legs out to the side about shoulder width or slightly wider.
    Perform Jumping Jacks Step 5.jpg
    5
    As you are moving your legs outward, you should raise your arms up over your head; arms should be slightly bent throughout the entire in-air movement.
    Perform Jumping Jacks Step 6.jpg
    6
    Your feet should land shoulder width or wider as your hands meet above your head with arms slightly bent.
    Perform Jumping Jacks Step 7.jpg
    7
    Quickly jump back to Step 2 and repeat Steps 3-6. Recommended 10-100 repetitions, depending on your physical health.
    Perform Jumping Jacks Step 8.jpg
    8
    If jumping jacks are your last workout of the day, cool down stretching is essential.

Tips

    It is highly important to stay hydrated whenever performing strenuous activities, this includes jumping jacks.
    If you have an extensive history with injuries it may be worth your time to consult your physician before carrying out jumping jacks.
    Half jacks can also be done with arms bent inward and then bringing the elbows up to about shoulder height.
    Rotator cuff injuries have been reported from consistently doing jumping jacks over time. To avoid injury you may also perform “half-jacks”, these are done the same way, except you only bring your arms parallel to your shoulders and back down.
    You may also perform advanced jumping jacks by holding lightweight dumbbells while completing the workout.

Things You'll Need

    Technically, there is no required equipment for performing jumping jacks except your body. Ideal apparel is, but not limited to:
        Gym shoes: Specifically a pair with good ankle support to help prevent rolling an ankle.
        Athletic shorts/pants: Any type of flexible material that allows for a wide range of motion is ideal. Such as nylon, polyester, and cotton.
        Athletic tops: Same rules should be applied for tops as the bottoms you wear; a material that is flexible for a wide range of motion.
        Tops such as sweaters should be avoided in room temperature or warmer conditions due to the risk of heat exhaustion.

