

Lunges are an easy and efficient exercise to help build strength in your quadriceps, glutes, hamstrings, calves, and core. They are also relatively safe to do as they have simple movements that are easy to follow, and lunges require no special equipment to complete. Lunges are also great to help you improve your balance, increase your hip flexibility, develop better coordination, build muscle strength, improving spine health, enhancing your core stability, and toning a good variety of muscle groups to provide balance in strength and muscle growth.[1]
Method 1
Performing the Forward Lunge

    Do Lunges Step 1 Version 3.jpg
    1
    Start in a standing position. Start by standing up straight with your feet hip-width apart and flat on the ground. Relax your shoulders and allow your shoulder blades to sink down towards your hips. Keep yourself in this position by flexing your abdominal muscles to keep your spine straight and stable.[2][3]
        Throughout a lunge exercise your arms and hands can be in any position that helps you maintain your balance. Some people may prefer to put their hands on their hips while others may prefer to keep their arms held out to the side.
        Ideally you should keep your back straight throughout a lunge exercise. This means you should try to keep your head upright while looking straight ahead. However, if you need to look down to ensure you’re in the right position, that’s okay.
        Some people find it helpful to stare at a particular space on a wall (or another object) directly in front of them to help keep their balance.
    Do Lunges Step 2 Version 3.jpg
    2
    Lift one foot off the floor and move it forward. Lift your right foot off the ground by bending your knee. Move your right foot forward like you’re taking a step. Place your right foot on the ground, heel first. Lean your body forward so you’re balanced on both feet, but keep your back and upper body straight.[4][5]
    Do Lunges Step 3 Version 3.jpg
    3
    Lower your body until your right knee is at a 90-degree angle. While keeping your upper body and back straight, continue to move your body forward until your right upper leg (thigh) is parallel to the floor. Your right lower leg (shin) should be perpendicular to the floor. You may need to bend your hips slightly to stay in this position, but keep your back straight.[6][7]
        Try not to move your right knee beyond your right foot. Your right knee should be positioned directly above your right ankle.
        Once in the lunge position, your left (back) knee should also form a 90-degree angle, but your lower leg (shin) will be parallel to the ground while your upper leg (thigh) will be perpendicular to the ground.
        Due to the position you’re in, you will only be able to keep your left toes on the ground. Your left heel will lift off the ground as you lean forward.
    Do Lunges Step 4 Version 2.jpg
    4
    Push yourself upwards with your right foot. Use your right foot to push yourself upwards. Return your body to the position you started in, standing straight with your feet hip-width apart.[8][9]
    Do Lunges Step 5 Version 2.jpg
    5
    Repeat the forward lunge. Once you’ve completed a lunge with your right leg, you can either switch sides and perform a lunge with your left leg, or you can continue to work your right side. It doesn’t matter what order you do lunges in, but try to do an equal number of lunges using both your left and right side before you finish.[10][11]
        Another alternative is to keep your right foot and left in the forward position, with your right foot flat on the ground, and unbend both your legs to move upwards.
        In this position your legs will be in a v-shape with your right leg in front. In a standing position both your right and left feet will be flat on the ground.
        After moving to this standing position, bend your legs and lower your body back into the lunge position. Repeat this several times and then switch to your left side.

Method 2
Reversing the Lunge

    Do Lunges Step 6 Version 2.jpg
    1
    Start in a standing position. Start the reverse lunge by standing straight up with your feet flat on the ground, hip-width apart. Keep your shoulders relaxed and keep your back straight and stable by using your abdominal muscles.[12][13]
        Throughout a lunge exercise your arms and hands can be in any position that helps you maintain your balance. Some people may prefer to put their hands on their hips while others may prefer to keep their arms held out to the side.
    Do Lunges Step 7 Version 2.jpg
    2
    Move your left foot and leg backward. Lift your left foot off the ground and move it backward. Lower your body until your left foot touches the ground, toes first.[14][15]
    Do Lunges Step 8 Version 2.jpg
    3
    Keep both of your legs at 90-degree angles. Once your left foot touches the ground, continue to shift your body backward until both your right and left legs form 90-degree angles at the knees. Your right lower leg (shin) should be perpendicular to the floor and your right upper leg (thigh) should be parallel to the floor. Your left lower leg (shin) should be parallel to the floor while your left upper leg (thigh) should be perpendicular to the floor.[16][17]
        You’re left foot will remain with only your toes touching the ground.
    Do Lunges Step 9 Version 2.jpg
    4
    Return to your starting position. Push off the floor with your left foot until you’re able to return to the starting position. Return your feet beside each other, both flat on the ground, hip-width apart.[18][19]
    Do Lunges Step 10 Version 2.jpg
    5
    Repeat the reverse lunge. Repeat the reverse lunge by either continuing on your left side (left leg going backwards) or switch to your right side (right leg going backwards). It doesn’t matter what order you perform the lunges in, but try to do an equal number of lunges on both sides before you finish your exercise routine.[20][21]

Method 3
Completing a Side Lunge

    Do Lunges Step 11 Version 2.jpg
    1
    Start in a standing position. Start the side lunge by standing up straight with your feet hip-width apart. Your head should stay upwards with your chin tilted slightly upwards. Place the majority of your weight on your heels and flex your abdominal muscles to keep your back stable. Relax your shoulders so they sink down towards your hips.[22][23]
        Throughout a lunge exercise your arms and hands can be in any position that helps you maintain your balance. Some people may prefer to put their hands on their hips while others may prefer to keep their arms held out to the side.
    Do Lunges Step 12 Version 2.jpg
    2
    Step to the right. Lift your right foot off the ground, by bending at the knee, and step to the right. Keep your left foot flat on the ground and your back straight. At this stage, your weight should all be on your left leg. Then, shift your weight to the right and place your right foot on the ground.[24][25]
        How far your feet will be apart may depend on your height, but aim to place your right foot at least 2 feet from your left foot.
        Adjust your stance as you go to whatever distance allows you to feel the stretch in your leg muscles without any discomfort.
    Do Lunges Step 13 Version 2.jpg
    3
    Bend your right knee. Once your right foot is on the ground, bend your right knee so your body continues to move lower. Keep your lower leg (shin) perpendicular to the floor and line up your right knee so it’s above your right ankle. Keep your left leg as straight as possible while your left foot remains flat on the ground. The majority of your weight should now be on your right leg.[26][27]
    Do Lunges Step 14 Version 2.jpg
    4
    Push off the floor with your right foot. Use your right foot to push yourself upwards and return yourself to the starting position standing straight up with both feet flat on the ground, hip-width apart.[28][29]
    Do Lunges Step 15 Version 2.jpg
    5
    Repeat the same steps on the left side. Complete a side lunge to the left following all the same steps, just in the opposite direction.[30][31]
        Alternatively, you can continue performing side lunges to the right and then move to your left side later.
        Ensure you perform the same number of lunges on both sides of your body before you finish your exercise routine.

Method 4
Adding Twists to a Forward Walking Lunge

    Do Lunges Step 16 Version 2.jpg
    1
    Start in a standing position. Start by standing straight up, with both feet flat on the ground, hip-width apart. Keep your back, upper body, and head straight. Use your abdominal muscles to keep your back stable.[32][33]
        To add some extra strength training to this type of lunge, hold a medicine ball in your hands directly in front of you. A medicine ball is heavier than a regular ball and comes in different weights. Select a weight that works for you.
        If you do not yet want to add the extra weight, use a regular ball instead. It is still helpful to hold something in your hands as you do the twist portion of the exercise.
    Do Lunges Step 17 Version 2.jpg
    2
    Lift your right foot off the ground. Start by lifting your right foot straight off the ground by bending at the knee. Pause in this position until you feel balanced. Keep your back and upper body straight by using your abdominal muscles.[34][35]
    Do Lunges Step 18 Version 2.jpg
    3
    Place your right foot on the ground heel first. Move your right leg forward and place your right foot on the ground starting with your right heel. Shift your upper body forward so your right knee bends. Your lower leg should be perpendicular to the floor while your upper leg should be parallel to the floor. Do not lean too far forward such that your knee moves beyond your right foot. You may need to lean forward slightly forward from your hips, but keep your back straight.[36][37]
    Do Lunges Step 19 Version 2.jpg
    4
    Twist your upper body to the right. While you’re in the forward lunge position, with your right leg forward and your right foot on the ground, twist your upper body to the right. Keep the medicine ball in both of your hands in front of you as you twist. Once you are facing to the right, twist back to your starting position.[38][39]
    Do Lunges Step 20 Version 2.jpg
    5
    Shift your left leg and foot forward. As this is a walking lunge, the next step is not to move back into the starting position, but rather to continue moving forward. Using the same movements you made with your right leg, lift your left foot off the ground and slowly move it forward like you’re taking a big step.[40][41]
        You will need to balance yourself on your right leg for a moment as you move your left leg forward.
    Do Lunges Step 21 Version 2.jpg
    6
    Put your left foot on the ground. Shift your body forwards while placing your left foot on the ground, heel first. Continue to shift your weight until your left upper leg is parallel to the ground and your left lower leg is perpendicular to the ground. Do not lean too far forward such that your left knee moves forward of your left foot. You may need to lean slightly forward at the hips, but keep your upper body and back straight.[42][43]
    Do Lunges Step 22 Version 2.jpg
    7
    Perform a twist to the left. Using the same twist movements, with your medicine ball in your hands in front of you, complete a twist to the left.[44][45]
    Do Lunges Step 23.jpg
    8
    Continue the movements as your lunge forward. Repeat the movements with your right and left leg as you continue to lunge forward twist, and lunge forward again. Continue moving forward until you’ve run out of space. You can then turn around and continue the walking lunges in the opposite direction.[46][47]

Method 5
Pushing Yourself with the 30-Day Lunge Challenge

    Do Lunges Step 24.jpg
    1
    Pick a 30-day period to complete the challenge. A 30-day lunge challenge is a great way to practice all types of lunges and get a great workout on a regular basis. Having a specific goal in mind when exercising can at times, increase your motivation. Before you get started, however, you’ll need to select a 30-day period that works best for you. Using an actual calendar month will probably be the most convenient and easiest to follow.[48]
    Do Lunges Step 25.jpg
    2
    Perform at least 100 lunges per week. Ideally, you should perform some lunges on a daily basis, but you don’t need to perform all 100 every day right from day 1. Start by performing 20-30 lunges per day until you can build up your endurance. However, try to fit in at least 100 lunges every week.[49]
    Do Lunges Step 26.jpg
    3
    Work your way up to 100 lunges per day. Once you’ve built up some endurance and energy, try to perform all 100 lunges every day. The lunges can be broken down as follows:[50]
        30 forward lunges, 15 for each leg
        40 side lunges, 20 to each side
        30 reverse lunges, 15 for each leg
    Do Lunges Step 27.jpg
    4
    Track your achievement. Keep track of the number of lunges you do every day, and which lunges you were able to perform. Even if you are not able to work your way up to 100 lunges a day, by tracking your progress you’ll be able to see how much you’ve improved over the 30 days.[51]
        Regardless of your progress, reward yourself with something at the end of the 30 days. Keep that reward in mind throughout the 30 days as an incentive to keep going.

Video
Tips

    In order to help you visualize the movements of a forward stationary and walking lunge, you may want to watch the following video on the Mayo Clinic website — http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/fitness/multimedia/lunge/vid-20084662.
    For added resistance, you can hold weights or dumbbells in both your hands while you perform the forward lunges. The amount of weight should be based on what you are comfortable with, don’t use weights that are too heavy. If you don’t have “real” weights or dumbbells, you can use household items like cans, plastic bottles filled with water (or another liquid), etc.[52]

