

If it's gotten to be a bit sticky underfoot, it may be time to mop. While there's nothing complicated about mopping, the right equipment and technique will make mopping more effective and less of a chore.
Steps


    Clear the area. Remove whatever tables, chairs, throw rugs and other obstacles are on the floor.
        If you're cleaning any of those things, too, clean them first. That way, if any debris falls on the floor, it'll fall before you clean.
        If you'll be cleaning counters, tabletops, or other surfaces, clean those first.
        Send anyone likely to walk over the floor out of the area. That includes children, spouses, housemates, pets, and guests.

    Sweep the floor or vacuum the floor first. It may seem redundant to clean something you're about to clean, but mops generally do a terrible job of picking up crumbs, dust, hair, and other solid debris. If you mop an unswept floor, you'll just end up pushing this stuff around. Moreover, dust and dirt can leave scratches on the floor if not removed first.
 
    Place the cleaner of your choice into the bucket and fill with enough warm water to cover the head of the mop completely. Leave enough of the bucket empty to allow yourself to add the mop and to keep the wringer up out of the water, if it is built into the bucket. An alternate method bypasses use of a bucket by using a wringer that attaches to your sink and you rinse your mop under running water instead of the water in a bucket. In this case make your choice of any cleaners directly to the mop or the floor.
        Use the cleaner according to the instructions on the package or bottle. Usually, that means just enough to make it suds up a bit. Don't use more cleaner than you need. It will not add much benefit and it could leave a residue or damage the floor.
        It is possible to use ordinary dish-washing detergent. Just a squirt added to the water or a few drops directly on your mop is adequate.
    Mop a Floor Step 4 preview.jpg

    Dip the mop in the cleaning solution and let it absorb the cleaner thoroughly or hold in running water. Sometimes a stiff, dried-out mop will need to soak for a little while to loosen up.
    Mop a Floor Step 5 preview.jpg
    5
    Wring the excess solution out of the mop. You want it damp, not soggy. However, for really dirty floors you will get better dissolving of dried grime with a wetter condition of your mop, then come back after with a drier wrung-out mop to pick up the dissolved grimy water.
    Mop a Floor Step 6 preview.jpg


    Start in one corner of the room. Move the mop around over the area you want cleaned with some pressure to pick up the dirt. When you have covered a small area, or when the mop looks dirty, dip and wring the mop again and move on to the next area.
        For polyurethaned hardwood floors, run the mop with the grain of the wood.[1]
        For textured floors, move the mop in small figure eight circles.[2]
    Mop a Floor Step 7 preview.jpg


    For persistent dirt, you may want to visit an area twice. The first time, leave the mop a bit wetter than usual and use it to dampen the area thoroughly. Let that sit for a few moments while you dampen the next area. The extra time gives the cleaning solution time to dissolve the soil. Then, dip the mop again and wring it out more thoroughly. Go back over the area to pick up the water and loosen any especially stubborn dirt.
    Mop a Floor Step 8 preview.jpg
    8
    Continue across the whole floor in this fashion.
    Mop a Floor Step 9 preview.jpg

 
    Work back towards a door and avoid stepping on the areas you have just cleaned. Any fine dust clinging to the bottoms of your shoes will stick to the floor and become mud. If you do step on an area that is wet, run the mop back over it to clean up these tracks.
    Mop a Floor Step 10 preview.jpg

  
    Let the mopped area dry thoroughly. Opening up doors or windows for circulation will speed the process. It's generally not necessary to dry a floor manually unless the surface shows streaks badly. Just let the air do the job.
    Mop a Floor Step 11 preview.jpg
    11
    Replace any furnishings you removed from the area.
    Mop a Floor Step 12 preview.jpg

    Hang the mop up to dry out when you are finished. If you leave in the bucket, it will rot and start to smell bad. Hang it with the wet end down and hang it somewhere where a bit of water underneath won't hurt.
        Dispose of dirty mop water in a toilet. It's a better place to put something that might have solid sediments, and you won't have any dirty sinks.
        While not strictly necessary, it's a good idea to rinse your mop and wring it thoroughly once more before hanging it up, so that the residues of dirt and cleaners don't sit in the mop all the time.

Tips

    If mopping doesn't thrill you, put on the music and think of it as a free workout.
    Change the dirty mop water a lot; if you see it's dirty, change it, otherwise you end up mopping your floors with dirty water and that's not the point of mopping.
    In narrow stretches such as corridors and hallways, mop the baseboards first and then the middle.
    The use of good doormats, inside and out, can help prevent a lot of dirt from getting tracked in, in the first place. So does the practice of not wearing shoes indoors.
    String mops, especially those made of natural fibers, are still some of the best out there, though a simple sponge mop may serve better if you are in a particularly small space.
    If heels have left scuffs on a floor, try rubbing at them with the non-marking rubber sole of another shoe. It's not always effective, but it often lifts the scuff like a big eraser.
    You can extend the time between real mopping sessions by spot mopping, mopping only the visibly dirty spots and/or traffic patterns. You can even scoot a moistened rag around with your foot to clean small areas or spills easily.
    A mop with a lot of material on the end of it, such as a large string mop, will be heavy when it is full of water. Choose a size that will be manageable for you, especially if you don't have a lot of floor to cover.

Warnings

    Do not use acid cleaners, such as vinegar, on stone floors. Marble, granite, and slate can be damaged by the acid.
    Avoid wringing the mop with your hands. Besides a lot of unpleasant dirt, mops can pick up shards of glass and other debris that could cut your skin. Get a bucket or a mop with a built-in wringer or now there's a wringer that fits on your sink, bypassing use of a bucket - search online for it; "sink mop wringer". It will do a better job anyway.
    Never mop waxed hardwood floors as the water can damage them.[3]

