

Nunchucks, or nunchaku, are a type of weapon that originated on Okinawa, an East Asian island. Most famous in Bruce Lee films, nunchucks are comprised of two sticks connected with a cord or chain. You too can master this unusual skill, which will give you an insight into martial arts, keep you relatively fit, and impress others.
Steps

    1
    Purchase your nunchucks. Go to a quality martial arts site and get foam or rubber training nunchucks with a cord. Do not buy a set of wooden, metal or hard acrylic nunchucks for your first pair
    Do Tricks With Nunchucks Step 1.jpg
    2
    Do Tricks With Nunchucks Step 2.jpg
    3
    Purchase a book. Nunchaku; Karate Weapons of Self Defence is a helpful intermediate guide for individuals who are experienced in martial arts. However, you may want to invest in a book that is aimed at a beginner's level.
    4
    Focus on basic moves. These moves are more beneficial for beginners. As Bruce Lee said, "I do not fear the man who has practiced 1000 moves once, but I fear the man who has practiced one move 1000 times." So practice!
    Do Tricks With Nunchucks Step 3.jpg
    5
    Do research. Watch Bruce Lee's "Fist of Fury," paying close attention to the scene in the karate dojo. Go on YouTube and search for "nunchaku" and/or "nunchuck tricks". Even if the techniques are too advanced for you, seeing them in action will help you get a feel for how nunchucks are used.
    Do Tricks With Nunchucks Step 4.jpg
    6
    Feel your nunchucks. They should be soft, not hard", as you might expect
    Do Tricks With Nunchucks Step 5.jpg
    7
    Learn basic tricks. Now you have "the feel", you can spin them faster, do a figure 8, and pass them under your legs, over your shoulder and under your arms.
    Do Tricks With Nunchucks Step 6.jpg
    8
    Try the complex stuff. Try to replicate a few of the moves you've seen on the Internet. Naturally, take it slow for your first time around. Work your way up the ladder, as many of these complex tricks are simply basic techniques used in an unusual way. More often than not, advanced moves are just basic steps executed with brilliant speed and impeccable timing. It can be difficult to remember to start off, but persevere and you will learn quickly.

Video
Tips

    Progress onto rubber nunchucks when you feel ready, as rubber is a heavier material. Then move on to wood.
    Once you are accomplished at passing, try to perfect a technique that allows you to curl the nunchuck around a body part without the free hand interfering. Essentially stopping the nunchuck swinging out of control, this is useful for practicing with two pairs of nunchucks.
    Try two pairs at once. See what you can do!
    Look at actual martial artists perform with and without nunchucks, and get the idea how to use that for an impressive trick or two.
    Practice! You won't get better without dedicating time to practice tricks and maneuvers.
    If you want to use a second pair, purchase one of the same type as the first, so they are the same weight, length and in balance.
    You can search for tutorials online at http://nunchakututorials.com for free.
    Passing is relatively easy in that you swing the nunchucks so that the free end travels round your body or body parts, to be caught by the free hand. Use your imagination.

Warnings

    Be aware that, unless they are used properly, nunchucks can and will seriously injure others, if not yourself. Take care when showing off your tricks.
    Be sensible. Don't try to do completely insane tricks you see someone do on a video game. They are almost impossible and should not be attempted for fear of cracking your head open.
    Wooden, acrylic or steel nunchucks may be illegal in some states or countries. Check before buying.
    As stated above, nunchucks are essentially ancient, deadly weapons. This article in no way gives you the right to go around the streets beating people up! Although using your nunchucks is fun, they are still a tool of the martial arts and should be treated how you would treat any other weapon or martial art: With respect.

