

There are many steps in order to become a pole vaulter. However, if they are not followed correctly, it could result in injury. Read this article to learn how to pole vault successfully.
Steps

    Pole Vault Step 1 Version 3.jpg

    spaceplay / pause

    escstop

    ffullscreen

    shift + ←→slower / faster (latest Chrome and Safari)

    ↑↓volume

    mmute

    ←→seek

     . seek to previous

    12…6 seek to 10%, 20%, …60%
    to Pole Vault
    1
    Buy an acceptable jumping pole. Length and the flex number (the weight it is made to be used for) of the jumping pole depends on the user's weight and height. Make sure that the pole is made out of a good material that won't break with the first jump. Remember, you're going to be resting all of your weight on this flimsy pole.
    Pole Vault Step 2 Version 3.jpg
    2
    Go to a pole vaulting pit. Make sure the pit is built to safety standards.
    Pole Vault Step 3 Version 3.jpg
    3
    Hold the pole correctly. Right-handed people should hold the pole with their right hand on top, and their left hand should be between one and two feet below it. On a first attempt you should only hold the pole as high as you can reach when the pole is being held completely upright. Extend your right hand above your head. Left-handed people, do this vice versa.
    Pole Vault Step 4 Version 3.jpg
    4
    Place the end of the pole in the vaulting box. Make sure your hands are in the same position as before.
    Pole Vault Step 5 Version 3.jpg
    5
    Stand on your left foot and drive your right knee into the air if you are right-handed. If you're left-handed, stand on your right foot and drive with your left knee. Take three large steps backwards for room.
    Pole Vault Step 6 Version 3.jpg
    6
    Run forward. To make it easier on the first few attempts simply keep your arms extended above your head. Take three running steps forward. On later attempts you can start the run up with your arms bent and the top part of the pole right above your hand resting on your shoulder ,later you can invert the pole, so that the end is up in the air and the top near the ground. During the three approach steps smoothly bring your right hand from it's initial position on your hip to it's final position above your head (as explained above). Be sure to keep your hand close to your body, bending your elbow instead of swing a stiff arm away from your body and then up. When you have mastered a three step approach and are confident with your vaulting ability the approach can be extended to a 12 to 16 step run-up.
    Pole Vault Step 7 Version 3.jpg
    7
    Jump off of your left foot, using your right knee to drive yourself up into the air. Jump off your right foot if you are left handed. You should move forward at a fast pace, with the pole providing more and more height. Run tall and jump off the ground,keep your left arm from collapsing into your body and let the pole flex.
    Pole Vault Step 8 Version 3.jpg
    8
    Swing your left leg up to the top of the pole while keeping the right knee in the 90 degree drive position in an attempt to get yourself as upside-down as possible. A good way to practice this is a one handed pop-up vault.
    Pole Vault Step 9 Version 3.jpg
    9
    Row through with your arms. Do this by bringing your top hand (your right hand, if you are right handed) down to your hip. This will give you additional height and keep you close to the pole.
    Pole Vault Step 10 Version 3.jpg
    10
    Turn. Up to this point your back has been facing the pit you are vaulting into. Now,pull and turn your hips around the pole. Initiate the turn by turning your right foot to the inside. As you pull your body should naturally turn around the pole so that your belly is now facing the pit.
    Pole Vault Step 11 Version 3.jpg

    spaceplay / pause

    escstop

    ffullscreen

    shift + ←→slower / faster (latest Chrome and Safari)

    ↑↓volume

    mmute

    ←→seek

     . seek to previous

    12…6 seek to 10%, 20%, …60%
    to Pole Vault
    11
    Push off of the pole when you are at your maximum height. Your feet should still be vertical (almost like doing a one-handed handstand push-up off of the top of the pole). One of the most difficult techniques is keeping yourself balanced in a vertical position with your head and shoulders down and your legs extended directly over them. Beginning and most intermediate vaulters will make the mistake of letting their legs fall toward the bar and cheating themselves out of two or more feet of height. Stay vertical as you pull and turn! Be careful! Most devastating injuries in pole vaulting occur when the vaulter lets go of the pole too early and falls headfirst into the box.
    Pole Vault Step 12 Version 3.jpg
    12
    Fall Let the mats of the pit catch you. Don't attempt to land on your feet, as this can possibly lead to a sprained ankle. If possible land on your back.

Video
Tips

    Have fun
    Pole vaulting involves some complicated movements with your body that you will not magically discover, so you should have someone to show you how it is done.
    The drive knee is very important. You want your toe pointing up.
    When you start feeling tired do not keep going this could cause a major injury
    Some weight training will help you be a better pole vaulter, it takes arm strength and a strong core to be a good vaulter.
    Last three steps are critical if you do not run fast don't expect to go up so good. Keep your arms straight or else you won't land straight ahead. Have fun!
    When running down the lane make sure it is an all out sprint.
    You won't get too high at first, but after practice, you will jump higher.
    Do not row. Rowing is a bad habit to get into and may help get immediate height but you can only go so far with rowing. Instead, push the pull away from you keep it straight and swing up off your top arm
    If you develop a serious interest, find an instructor, set yourself up in a competition, or just have fun challenging yourself to reach higher and higher heights!
    When you plant the pole in the plant box make sure that your bicep is touching your head and both of your arms are straight
    To prevent you from slowing down before you plant the tip of the pole in the pole vaulting pit, be sure to do some "planting the pole" exercises for muscle memory.

Warnings

    Be sure that your pole is appropriate for your height and weight.
    Have supervision at all times.
    Practice a with a bungee cord. It will hurt if you land on the fiberglass competition crossbar.
    If jumping a bar, never land feet first on the mat. The mat gives and can lead to serious ankle injuries.
    Check the pit for holes or rips before vaulting.
    Pole vault is a dangerous sport. People have been seriously injured or have died while pole vaulting. Check equipment before use and be sure that you know what you are doing before attempting as misuse or broken equipment can lead to injury or death.
    If you are planting the pole when you are "in", then you will have shoulder trouble. Be sure to be perpendicular with the ground 90% of the time
    Use a pole rated at or above your weight (a stiffer pole is less dangerous than one that is too flexible) you could be seriously injured if using a pole rated far below your weight.

