

Do you need to do the rope climb in gym? Or do you just want to get better at climbing a rope for fun or exercise? Follow these instructions and with some care and concentration, you'll be making your way up the rope in no time.
Steps

    Climb a Rope Step 1.jpg
    1
    Grab the rope with both hands above your head.
    Climb a Rope Step 2.jpg
    2
    Pull down on the rope while jumping a bit and you will be lifted into the air.
    Climb a Rope Step 3.jpg
    3
    Wrap the rope around one leg, and use your feet to pinch the rope, thus anchoring yourself.
    Climb a Rope Step 4.jpg
    4
    Reach up as high as possible with your arms (some say no higher than your nose), and grip the rope tightly.
    Climb a Rope Step 5.jpg
    5
    Release the rope from your feet. Using your abdominals, bring your knees up to your chest. Re-secure your feet on the rope.
    Climb a Rope Step 6.jpg
    6
    Stand up with your legs, and re-reach as high as possible with your arms.
    Climb a Rope Step 7.jpg
    7
    Repeat the inch-worm process until the top of the rope has been reached.
    Climb a Rope Step 8.jpg
    8
    Loosen the grip of your feet on the rope when coming down. Support your weight evenly between your feet and hands, slide your feet down and place hand-over-hand on the way down.

Video
Tips

    Some ropes are knotted. You can use these knots to rest your feet on while you move your hands up.
    Build up your upper body strength.
    Wearing shoes and pants will help prevent the rope from rubbing on your skin.
    Work smoothly and efficiently.
    Take rests when you need them.
    To improve your grip, try hanging a rolled up towel over a bar or anything you could use for pull ups. Then, holding the towel in both hands, perform a pull up 90 degrees to the bar to one shoulder then down and pull up to the other.
    Do press-ups and sit-ups to get fit and make rope climbing easier.
    Know your limits; if you feel at all tired, stop, climb back down rest, have a drink and try again when you feel you can.
    Make sure the rope supports your weight or you might land a trip to the hospital

Warnings

    If you feel at all dizzy, descend immediately. You risk falling off the rope and possibly seriously injuring yourself.
    Don't slide down the rope too fast. You don't want rope burn!
    If someone is available, have them spot you. You might need them to call for help.
    Don't let go and fall off the rope.

