

Salsa may look hard and sophisticated, but when it comes down to it, it just involves a simple basic step and basic turns. Here are some easy instructions on getting down the basic right turn in L.A. style salsa (salsa on 1). While there is also a left turn, right turns are much more common and are easy to do.
Method 1
Salsa Right Turn for Men

    Do Salsa Turns Step 1.jpg
    1
    Step forward on left foot on count 1.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 2.jpg
    2
    Keeping your feet on the ground, slide your feet to the right so that you are facing the opposite direction, shifting your weight to your right leg on count 2.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 3.jpg
    3
    Spin around on your right foot to face the front again, completing the turn.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 4.jpg
    4
    Pause with your feet centered on count 4.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 5.jpg
    5
    Step back on your right foot for count 5.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 6.jpg
    6
    Step in place with your left foot on 6.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 7.jpg
    7
    Bring your right foot back to center on count 7 (so that your feet are together again).
    Do Salsa Turns Step 8.jpg
    8
    Pause on count 8.

Method 2
Salsa Right Turn for Ladies

    Do Salsa Turns Step 9.jpg
    1
    Step back on your right foot on count 1.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 10.jpg
    2
    Step in place with the left foot on count 2.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 11.jpg
    3
    Bring your feet back together on count 3.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 12.jpg
    4
    Pause on count 4.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 13.jpg
    5
    Step forward on your left foot on count 5.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 14.jpg
    6
    Pivot onto your right foot on count 6 (keeping feet on the ground, just turn your toes to face the wall behind you).
    Do Salsa Turns Step 15.jpg
    7
    Spin on your right foot on count 7 to face the front.
    Do Salsa Turns Step 16.jpg
    8
    Pause with your feet together on count 8.

Tips

    You should stay off of your heels and dance on the balls of your feet the whole time.
    Men: If you are executing your turn with a partner, merely lift up your left hand on count 1, then go into your turn.
    Every time you do a right turn in salsa, you will step back on your right foot after you have turned.
    Dancing in socks or with shoes with smooth bottoms makes turning much easier. Athletic shoes are difficult to turn in because of the rubber soles.
    Keep your head up!
    Men: If you want your partner to turn, lower your hand on count 1 then up on count 3 so that your hand is at the top of your partner's head. That is her cue to begin her turn -- she will then step forward on count 5 then turn on 6 and 7. Everyone pauses on 8.

