Sure, we've all learned to chew at a young age, but most people don't realize the importance of properly chewing food. Chewing food thoroughly has numerous benefits, such as improving digestion and appreciation of food, reducing appetite and cravings, eliminating bad breath and excessive gas, and strengthening the immune system, along with many others. Here is how to chew properly to reap all those benefits.
Steps
Chew Food Properly Step 1.jpg
1
Give yourself enough time. Do not eat while you are in a rush. Instead, allow yourself enough time so that you can take your time and chew thoroughly. Manage your time so you are not in a hurry.
Chew Food Properly Step 2.jpg
2
Cut the food into small portions. It is important not to put too much in your mouth at once, as this makes it more difficult to chew the food thoroughly. The smaller the bites, the better.
Chew Food Properly Step 3.jpg
3
Chew thoroughly. Although the exact number of chews vary with the texture of the food and the salivary glands of the person, the food should be a complete liquid and lose all texture.
Chew Food Properly Step 4.jpg
4
Swallow slowly. Do not gulp an entire mouthful of food down your throat at once. This can cause choking or damage to the esophagus.
Chew Food Properly Step 5.jpg
5
Wait until you are completely finished chewing before taking another bite. Give yourself enough time to let the food pass through your esophagus before putting more in your mouth. It is helpful to put your knife and fork down in between bites to avoid this.
Video

Tips
Be sure to drink at least six to eight glasses of water each day to enhance saliva production. This will aid in the digestion process.
Foods that are already mostly liquid, such as jello or yogurt, should be chewed the same as solid foods to allow the saliva to break them down before entering the stomach.
Warnings
Do not eat while driving, operating machinery, watching television, or otherwise occupying your brain in a way that can distract you from eating. When your brain is distracted, it is harder to control how you chew.