Learning to dive is an exciting next step to take once you're comfortable jumping into a pool. Diving headfirst feels exhilarating, and since it helps you swim faster and reach further depths, it opens up a whole new side of swimming in the pool. Learning to dive can be a little nerve-wracking at first, but doing dry runs on land, practicing from a crouching position and having a spotter help you can make the process easier. See Step 1 to learn how to dive into a pool with the correct form and work your way up to advanced dives.
Part
1
Edit
Working Up to Diving
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 1
spaceplay / pause escstop ffullscreen shift + ??slower / faster (latest Chrome and Safari)
??volume mmute
??seek  . seek to previous 12…6 seek to 10%, 20%, …60%
to Dive Into a Pool
1
Find a deep diving pool. Since diving means entering a pool headfirst, the water has to be deep enough so that you don't hit the bottom too quickly and risk getting a head or spine injury. The Red Cross considers nine feet to be a good depth for diving if you want to be especially cautious, but the diving area in many pools is eight feet deep. Never dive into a pool that's less than eight feet deep.[1]
If you're unsure how deep a pool is, it's best to avoid diving there. It can be hard to gauge a pool's depth just by looking. Find a pool where the depth of the water is clearly marked. In many cases there will also be a sign posted that specifies diving is permitted there.
Avoid diving into lakes, ponds and other natural bodies of water unless the area is supervised and has been cleared for diving. The depth of the water in these natural places is very inconsistent, and there may be boulders hiding in the water that you can't see from the shore.

Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 2
2
Get used to the thought of diving in headfirst. Many beginner divers, especially kids, are afraid to dive at first. It makes sense, since in any other situation launching toward something headfirst would result in pain and injury. If you're nervous about taking the plunge, try these techniques to feel more comfortable with the idea:
Jump into the water feet first, so you get used to the feeling of entering water from a height. Sometimes kids think that water is hard, so it can help to point out to them that it's soft as you encourage them to splash around.
Practice falling while you're in the water. Stand up in the water and let yourself fall forward, then let yourself fall backward. See how the water "catches" you and prevents you from getting hurt.
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 3
3
Do a dry run on land before diving into water. Since diving can be intimidating when you're a beginner, it helps to practice on land and visualize how the dive will go before you enter the water. Stand upright with your arms straight above your head, your upper arms hugging your ears. Keep your hands flat and place one palm over the other. Tuck in your chin. This is the way your upper body should be composed when you dive into the water.
You can practice the motion of diving on land as well. Find a grassy area or practice indoors on soft carpet. Get down on one knee and angle your arms and fingertips toward the ground. Roll forward so that your hands touch the ground, followed by your arms. Keep going until you're flat on your belly.
Remember to hold your hands flat and place one on top of the other, rather than clasping them. Tucking your chin into your chest is equally important. These actions help to streamline your body, making your entry into the water smoother.
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 4
4
Crouch close to the pool and glide into the water. Stand with your toes slightly over the edge of the pool, and crouch down close. Put your arms in position over your head - remember to tuck in that chin! - and point your hands toward the water. Now rock your body forward and gently glide into the water headfirst. As your legs follow your upper body, straighten them out and point your toes.
As you enter the water, exhale, then hold your breath. You might accidentally inhale underwater if you feel startled, but once you get the hang of diving it'll feel natural to hold your breath.
Practice diving from a crouch until you feel completely comfortable entering the water this way. Once it starts to feel easy and you're ready to move on, you can dive from a standing position.
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 5
5
Dive from a standing position. When you're ready to try it standing up, edge close to the pool so that your toes are at the edge. Get your arms and hands in position and bend at the waist, pointing your fingers toward the water. Tuck in your chin, then tilt forward into the water. As your legs follow your upper body, keep them together and point your toes.
Consider having a spotter help you the first few times. The act of diving from a standing position can be a little intimidating, and it might help to know that someone else is there to help you. Have the person stand next to you and place one hand on your belly and the other on your back, so that he or she can guide you into the water.
Once you can dive from a standing position without needing a spotter, you're ready to advance to learning a proper dive using the correct form. Soon you'll be leaping into the water without a second thought!

Part
2
Edit
Diving With Good Form
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 6
1
Place your lead foot over the rim of the pool. If you're right-handed, your lead foot will be your right foot, and if you're left-handed it will be your left foot. Place your lead foot slightly in front of your back foot, so your toes slightly jut over the pool. Your back foot should be flat on the ground, with your weight balanced equally over your feet. This is the starting position for a dive.
As you work on your diving form, try to start with your feet in the exact same place every time. If you dive off of a diving board you may want to mark the spot where your feet should go to help you practice.
Once you're comfortable diving from a stationary position, you can work up to doing a walking or running dive. This involves taking three or five steps forward, then leaping off of your lead foot into your dive.
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 7
spaceplay / pause escstop ffullscreen shift + ??slower / faster (latest Chrome and Safari)
??volume mmute
??seek  . seek to previous 12…6 seek to 10%, 20%, …60%
to Dive Into a Pool
2
Point your arms above your head. Just as you did when you first practiced on land, raise your arms above your head, with your elbows straight. Tuck your upper arms against your ears. Hold your hands flat, with one palm resting over the back of your other hand. Hold your arms and hands in this position until you're ready to dive.
As always, remember to keep your chin tucked down to your chest.
If you do a walking or running dive, you'll start with your arms at your side, but they should always end up in an upright position before you enter the water.
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 8
3
Push off and dive into the pool. Rather than tipping forward and falling in, push off with your lead foot to add distance to your dive. Enter the water fingertips first. Keep your body straight as you dive, with your legs together and your toes pointed. Once your body is fully in the water, you can start swimming or immediately come up for air.
Remember to exhale as you enter the water and hold your breath while you're in. You should be able to swim around for several seconds before needing to surface.
Try walking or running into your dive if you want to dive further and faster. No matter how you start your dive, your body should always enter the water at the same angle and using the same basic form.

Part
3
Edit
Trying Advanced Dives
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 9
1
Dive off of a starting block. In competitive swimming, races begin with a dive off of a starting block, raised slightly above the surface of the pool. To dive from this position, you start in a crouch, gripping the edge of the block with both your fingers and your toes. When the starting bell or shot sounds, you spring into a low dive and start swimming the moment you hit the water.
When you're diving off of a starting block, it's important to streamline your body so that you enter the water with as little splashing as possible. Keep your body in a straight line and point your toes. This will minimize the water's drag on your body so you won't lose precious seconds during the race.
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 10
2
Dive from the high board. When you've gotten comfortable from diving from the side of the pool, you might want to try it from a diving board. Diving off the low board isn't too different from the side of the pool, but the high board is a different story. It's usually about 10 feet (3.0 m) above the water, and requires climbing a ladder to get to the top.
Make sure the high dive is above very deep water, since you'll be entering the water faster. The water should be at least 12 feet (3.7 m) deep to be on the safe side.
You can use the same basic diving form to dive off the high dive as you'd use any other time. The key is to enter the water at an angle that gives you a smooth entry. If you lay out too flat, you'll end up doing a painful belly flop.
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 11
3
Learn to hurdle off a diving board. This is the proper term for starting a dive from a walk or run. You take three to five steps, followed by a one-legged jump before entering the water. Hurdling is done before any type of advanced dive that requires gaining height in order to move or contort your body before you actually enter the water. To hurdle, do the following:
Start at the back of the diving board and take three to five steps. Three will give you plenty of momentum for a good hurdle, but you can take five if you have shorter legs or feel more comfortable taking more steps.
On the last step, you should be near the end of the diving board. Lunge and jump, swinging your arms upward at the same time. Don't jump off the diving board; jump straight into the air.
Land on the diving board with your feet in position to dive and your arms over your head. Now you're ready to jump off of the diving board and execute your dive.
Image titled Dive Into a Pool Step 12
spaceplay / pause escstop ffullscreen shift + ??slower / faster (latest Chrome and Safari)
??volume mmute
??seek  . seek to previous 12…6 seek to 10%, 20%, …60%
to Dive Into a Pool
4
Do a jackknife. This advanced dive looks elegant and is a good next step once you've mastered the basic dive. Your body will rise up from the board, fold forward at the hips, then straighten into a dive. To do a jackknife, follow these steps:[2]
Begins with a hurdle. Take three to five steps, lunge and jump, and land on the edge of the board with your arms over your head. Jump off and slightly away from the diving board.
Raise your hips above shoulder level as you jump off the board.
Reach your arms down toward your toes. Your body should look like and upside-down V.
Straighten your body to complete the dive.

It is possible to successfully jump off a cliff into a lake or the ocean. In fact, it's an extreme sport for some people, and it's a tourist attraction in places such as La Quebrada in Mexico where the famed clavadistas dive regularly each day.

However, while this equipment-free extreme sport can be both fun and thrilling, it can be very dangerous and tourism promoters don't ever promote cliff-diving as an activity. If you don't know the proper procedures, your first dive could also be your last.

This article is an educational exercise to help you learn what you're in for if you do decide to try this extreme sport some day. And as with any extreme sport, having a guide and training first is both essential and sensible, so these instructions are provided for general educational purposes only and are by no means a substitute for proper training or expertise!
EditSteps
Image titled Dive Off a Cliff Step 11
Find a cliff with a significant amount of water underneath it. The need for a certain water depth is determined by the height of the cliff; for example, for 30-40 feet (9-12 meters) of drop, the water below must be at least 12 feet (4+ meters) deep and free of any objects. If there is significant wave action be certain that when the wave is out you still have the minimum amount of water depth below you. Research the area you're planning to jump off and also check out the guidelines put in place by the World High Diving Federation because they have some very useful height and depth measurements that they have calculated to reduce risks.[1] Also ask boaters, expert jumpers who have already jumped the relevant cliff, marina or tourist staff, and other people who would have knowledge about the cliff and its suitability for diving off. If it's already a place where people jump off successfully, that may be a good reassurance or may give you cause to pause if you learn otherwise. See "Tips" for famous cliff-diving locations.
Be aware of the laws regarding the cliff. If it's a tourist attraction like La Quebrada, you can be certain that no tourist will actually be allowed to perform a dive. And if it's a known diving location, there may be warning signs or requirements in place that you need to know about. Ask around before assuming anything.
Check out access to the cliff. Unless you're diving in shoes (see next step), you may be clambering up a rocky cliff face in bare feet and you'll need to know which access routes the experienced cliff divers usually use.

Image titled Dive Off a Cliff Step 22
Dress appropriately. For a cliff jump under 30 feet, wear a secure and aerodynamic bathing suit; avoid anything flimsy or flapping and definitely have nothing that's over-sized. Remember - this gear has to stay on when you land in that water!
For cliffs over 30 feet, it is best to jump in soft cloth shorts and have tennis shoes on your feet.
Goggles are not recommended during a jump as they will fly off when you hit the water.
Some advice suggests that a wetsuit is best because it provides impact cushioning between your skin and the water as you hit it.
Preferably, don't wear glasses but contacts are permissible if you're good at keeping your eyes shut until you surface.
Image titled Dive Off a Cliff Step 33
Check for rocks. Find a pair of excellent goggles and a snorkel for the checking crew to wear. Have at least two snorkelers swim underneath the cliff you intend to jump off as "spotters" for possible dangers. They will examine the area for hidden rocks, branches, limbs, or other projections that could cause you harm when you jump and hit the water. While snorkeling, identify a location that will allow jumpers to climb back out of the water and to the top of the cliff again.
An example of a landing danger is shown by La Quebrada's unique situation. The cliff dive here can only be undertaken at high tide and even then the dive must end when an incoming wave pushes up the water to its highest point in the inlet! That kind of precision takes years of training and care and isn't something you can just jump into unawares.
Image titled Dive Off a Cliff Step 44
Check the cliff itself for obstacles. Are there any snags, parts jutting out, or other possible obstacles that could break your fall or throw you off course? Be sure to avoid any cliff that has such problems because they increase the risk tremendously. Another thing to check for is the safest way back to shore, avoiding rocks and riptides, etc.
Also look for wind problems. Everything may look great but certain features might cause wind problems that could slam you back into the cliff. Ask experts who have dived off that cliff first.
Is there wildlife hanging about? Even hitting a fish can cause injury but hitting a dolphin, whale or seal will definitely cause problems. Avoid any area teeming with wildlife.
Image titled Dive Off a Cliff Step 55
Be under no illusions – cliff-diving does present a danger to your body. Diving off a cliff is not only dangerous because of the cliff itself and the water below but also because of the speed of impact. A jump from 20 feet (6 meters) above water will cause you to hit the water at 25 mph (40 kph) and that can compress your spine, break your bones or cause concussion.[2]
The World High Diving Federation recommends that no cliff dives of 65.5 feet (20 meters) or higher take place without professional scuba divers being positioned in the water.[3]
Before you attempt a cliff dive – can you dive? It's foolhardy to be jumping off a cliff not knowing the basic principles of a safe and good dive technique and to know how it feels to dive. It's recommended that you practice diving off high diving platforms at the local pool before trying cliff diving. And this should also be done under supervision until you know what you're doing – diving at any height is dangerous when you don't know how to do it properly.

 
Image titled Dive Off a Cliff Step 66
Make the great jump! You will need to propel yourself off the cliff using your knees as a propulsion unit. Falling off the cliff is dangerous as you may hit the side on your way down. Jumping away from the surface will keep you away from the side of the cliff and protect you from harm.
Start by standing erect, with feet together, arms raised straight above your head and bend your knees.
Bring your arms down, then back to hip level and sweep them forward as you drive forward with your legs.
Leap straight out with your body facing perpendicular to the water. While still perpendicular to the water, arch your back and as you do so, gravity will pull you to the vertical position.
In the air, you will need to be as straight as possible (like a pencil). Once gravity has pulled you to this position, bring your arms over your head and place your right hand in a fist with your left locked over it (or vice versa if preferred).
Jump staying straight, with your toes pointed to the water at all times.
Enter the water vertically, perpendicular to the surface. Do not aim to land on your face, stomach, or bottom as this can incur severe damage if you do.
Image titled Dive Off a Cliff Step 77
Land well. When you hit the water, stretch your legs and arms out and arch your back. This will keep you from going too deep into the water. Swim to the top and then find your predetermined location to climb back up!
If people are watching, give them a wave to let them know you're okay.
8
Finished.