Long back, swords were vital tools of survival, and today that knowledge can still be used. Consider this, one day you are walking through a park when someone tries mugging you with a baseball bat, or you are otherwise attacked by armed opponents. Unless you are a 4th degree blackbelt, you won't win this. But suppose there is a fallen branch by you, or a pipe lying in the ally way. Perhaps this would happen on your way back from baseball practice, and you just happen to have a bat of your own. This guide may very well save your life. Stick with Boffer swords (pvc pipe covered in soft foam), plastic swords or wooden swords when training training with a friend. When training under a master use live steel; it has a more realistic feel.

This article was not written by an expert on the subject, so use this advice with a certain level of discretion and common sense, it may not be the best advice available.
EditSteps
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 11
Grip your sword with your dominant hand (in this article it will be referred to as the right hand and the non-dominant as the left henceforth). Switch this if you are left-handed) right below the guard and grab the pommel(bottom of the sword) with your left hand. If the pommel is very uncomfortable to grip, stick with the basic two hand grip.

Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 22
With the left hand, grip the sword tightly with the pinky, ring, and middle finger, the others should have a semi-tight grip. The right hand is not used for striking!
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 33
Hold your sword so that the pommel is right above your bellybutton (don't rest it on the stomach, keep it a little ways out) and point the tip somewhere between the sternum and throat. Now if they charge full on they'll run into your weapon.
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 44
When striking, stab at the sky, bringing your left hand up past your eye, then come down on them, using your right hand to guide the blade and using the left hand to set the force in to the blade. The right hand should be the axis or pivot.
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 55
Now the footwork. Place your left foot behind your right foot (other way around if you're left handed) and stand on the balls of your left foot. Keep your balance!

 
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 66
When you strike, you push with your left foot, sliding your right foot on the ground and raise your sword. Now bring your left foot back into position and STRIKE!
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 77
When striking, keep your right arm straight (but not locked, you don't want it broken) and bend it when it reaches your head. Reverse what you just did to strike, but remember, your strike with the hand closest to the pommel, you use your dominant hand to guide.
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 88
Practice your strikes. Don't weakly hit them, keep each and every swing full and powerful. Keep your battle cry strong (otherwise known as your kiai[kee-eye]) so your hit stays strong. After you are good at individual strikes, try them in a string, hit the gloves, then immediately advance to hit the head!
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 99
Don't get set in your ways too much. If you go to get taught by a true swordsman, you will have to throw away all you thought you knew about armed combat and take every bit of knowledge from the trainer.
Image titled Use Any Two Handed Sword Step 1010
And finally, DON'T GIVE UP! If you want to be any sort of blades man you will have to practice daily. If you become rusty, you'll fall behind.


EditTips
Strikes to the glove will be the easiest strike at first as it is right below the guard. Cut the glove first, then they will be disarmed or they will flinch.
Don't be overly honorable. This means your life. If you have no weapon, throw dirt in his eyes and spring on him, doing your best to disarm him. If he will still be mobile after your move, make sure to take his weapon and turn it on him. Otherwise, leave the weapon and RUN!!!
Often, when using a weapon, you may be tempted to use just your arms to swing with the blade. Don't do this. Instead, use your entire body to swing the weapon, as this allows much more force to be applied to the attack, and also doesn't damage your muscles as much.
If you can disarm them, there is no further need of conflict, don't kill unless your life is in immediate danger (like if they pull a gun)
If you are using a fragile arm (a brittle stick or a baton which will bend on the first strike) be sure to avoid arm to arm contact as this will leave you defenseless. If your weapon is flexible, you can collide, because with any luck it will bend under the opponents weapon and you'll be ready for another strike while he recovers from his.
Improvise! Just about any long, hard object can be used as a weapon. When you're in a bind, you can't be picky, your object is to disable your opponent before he can kill you.
Combine attacks, Hit the glove and immediately go for the head or a stab to the chest.
If you are still practicing use either sticks or feathered dusters to make sure you don't get hurt during practice.
Don't try to be an anime samurai! Don't use massive monologues, don't try to be badass, it all makes you look pathetic and it wastes too much energy.