Golf is one of the most popular sports. It is quite easy to take up and gives you the chance to have a great time outdoors and meet new people.
EditSteps
Image titled Learn to Play Golf Step 11
Get a lesson! You've probably been to the driving range with your friends who are golfers, and that's how you decided you wanted to get into the sport..correct? That's a great introduction to the game, however if you want to start learning the basic mechanics of the golf swing, you'll want to take a lesson from a certified teaching professional (PGA or WGTF). Most decent golf courses and driving ranges will have a teaching professional and they usually have good package deals for beginner golfers, and will often have group lessons for discounted rates. Consider setting up an individual lesson, where the professional will go over the basics such as grip, stance, posture, and swing mechanics. Don't fall into the temptation to allow your friends to teach you. While their intentions are good, they will do your golf swing more harm than good. Golf professionals know how to teach a golf swing, that's why they are professionals. Get some lessons and learn properly.

Image titled Learn to Play Golf Step 22
Buy a used set of golf clubs (). This does not have to be a full set, just a few clubs will do (3 wood, 5, 7, 9 iron, pitching wedge/sand wedge and a putter. Used clubs caution: If the grips don’t fit your hand, or the shafts are too firm or the wrong length, you'll have an unpleasant experience. Blisters, and the arm equivalent of shin splints, can occur. Just like shoes, you need clubs that “fit.”
Image titled Learn to Play Golf Step 33
Take some time to learn the rules of golf and the etiquette, as this is just as important as being able to hit the ball 300 yards (274.3 m). The game of golf is about honesty, honor and respect, not just hitting a ball around a grassy park. You can get a copy of the official rules at the USGA website. Keep it in your bag and study it so you know the rules for any particular situation you may find yourself in on the course. As for etiquette, these are just common sense issues more than anything. Don't walk in other peoples putting lines because it can disturb the grass and make putts go offline. Don't talk when others are hitting. Don't stand directly behind or in front of a player who's swinging a club. Always dress appropriately and according to golf course rules. These are just some of the basics but as you play more you'll learn the in's & out's of golf etiquette, and don't be afraid to ask a seasoned golfer about a rule or an etiquette issue. They're usually happy to help a beginner learn.
Image titled Learn to Play Golf Step 44
Look around for a golf pro (teacher) in your area. Most golf courses have a pro or can refer you to one. Book 3 or 4 lessons from the pro, ask for a package rate.
Image titled Learn to Play Golf Step 55
Learn the basics, such as how to grip the club, how to stand over (address) the golf ball, how to swing the golf club, how to putt, etc. The pro should show you all these basics. You can also watch online videos and read one of the many golf guides online.

 
Image titled Learn to Play Golf Step 66
Go to a driving range a few times before you head out onto the course. Your aim is to be more confident in your club and shot selection, knowing the distances and average trajectory of the clubs you use is essential. Also, using the driving range before a round will give you an idea of how the weather is affecting your shot. Is it windy? Is the humidity making the ball heavy and affecting distance? Practicing at the range lets you find these things out without costing strokes.
Image titled Learn to Play Golf Step 77
Try going out to a 9 hole golf course first. If you don't have a lot of time to play, or cannot hit the ball far enough yet, then you could try the driving range or a pitch and putt course a few more times. These are handy to practice.
Image titled Learn to Play Golf Step 88
As you progress, it is vital to work on your short game (putting and pitching). Think about it. It is useless being able to hit the ball 200 yards (182.9 m), depending how strong you are you should be able to drive the ball 250, and not have a clue what to do when you get to the green. In an average round, you will use your driver 12-15 times, depending on the course. On every single course you will use your putter about 30 times in a round, depending on your ability. The short game is the key to a lower handicap.

Community Q&A
How far does the average golfer drive the ball?
wikiHow Contributor
About 220 yards (200 meters) for men, and about 200 yards (180 meters) for women.
Not Helpful 2 Helpful 5
Ask a Question

What do you need to know? We'll do our best to find the answer.
Submit
EditTips
Before taking a shot, look around, and make sure that there is nothing you could hit or collide with while you are taking a shot, especially golf bags, trees, and people!
Have respect for your fellow players. Never talk while they are making a stroke, or comment on their style of play or swing.
Make sure your cell phone is either off or on silent while on the golf course.
Don't forget to stretch before playing/practicing. A full day of golf can be a great strain on your back. In addition, greater range of motion usually means longer golf shots.
If you plan to take lessons, inquire whether the pro has rental clubs you can borrow for the first few lessons. It makes sense to find out if you like golf and get the pro's input before investing any money in clubs.
Talking on your cell phone is discouraged and considered rude.
Don't walk in another player's "line" while putting.
Focus on your putting. Use of practice greens is free at most golf courses and driving ranges, and won't tire you out the way hitting balls at a driving range does. Roughly half of your strokes will be putts, so learning to putt pays big dividends; there's a reason the pros say "drive for show, putt for dough."
When you are at the driving range, always have a target, Eg the red flag.
Take out the flag when you are putting in a competition, once all the other players have reached the green. If you hit the flag with your putt, it is a two stroke penalty. Suddenly, your chance at a birdie turns into a bogey...
Show 13 more tips

EditWarnings
Focus and use golf training aids at home, away from distractions.
Always yell "Fore" when your shot is approaching another group on the course. Don't be ashamed to yell it as loud as humanly possible. It's more embarrassing to actually hit someone.
Lightning is a very serious threat--when the weather siren goes off--take cover immediately!
When starting out, do not buy brand new, expensive golf clubs. You will probably not be good enough to use them properly, and you will do better with second hand golf clubs at the start.
Put on sunscreen if you're going to play for a long while in the sun. Sunburn can make golf a lot less fun.
EditThings You'll Need
Golf clubs(old ones) (new ones)
A golf pro or teacher
A place to practice (driving range, Practice area at a golf course)
The right frame of mind - Golf is a game that requires a lot of patience and taking your game too seriously at the very beginning will only lead to you becoming very disappointed. Getting good takes time, play for fun at the beginning!