Hugs are a great way to express affection. Hugging shows that you care about a person and that you support that person through good times and bad. However, you want to hug your crush or your lover differently than you hug a friend or family member. Read on for some tips on the best ways to hug the people that you care about.
Method
1
Edit
Hugging a Crush
Image titled Hug Step 11
Approach your crush carefully. Smile and say some caring words or compliments. Make sure that he or she is expecting a hug! It can be awkward if you come up and hug someone out of the blue, especially in the city.
Hugs often happen at celebratory events like birthday parties, graduations, or when two people are reunited after a long absence (that may be the right time to give someone a nice hug).

Image titled Hug Step 22
Lean forward and put your two arms around your crush, pressing the person you are hugging warmly toward you. Lucky you!
If you are a man, her arms should be around your neck, and you should be embracing her around the waist. Keep her in that position for no more than a couple seconds, and let go and soon as she does. Look her in the eyes when you separate and continue the conversation naturally.
If you are the woman, put your arms behind his neck and press your chest lightly against his chest. Let go as soon as he does. Do not linger or you will seem desperate.

Method
2
Edit
Hugging a Friend
Image titled Hug Step 31
Go up to your friend. Give your friend a genuine smile.
Image titled Hug Step 42
Embrace your friend.
Girls: Close your eyes and think about how much you love your friend when hugging. Press as much as you feel like without squishing your friend. Do not clap the person you're hugging on the shoulders. Some girls think you don't like them if you do it that way.
Guys: Embrace strongly, and clap each other on the top of your backs. If you're having an emotional moment, hold the hug for a brief moment and do not clap each others backs.

Method
3
Edit
Hugging a Lover
Image titled Hug Step 51
Approach your lover and put your hands on his or her shoulders. The experience is just as romantic no matter who initiates the hug.

 
Image titled Hug Step 62
Look your lover in the eyes and say, "I love you." If you want to, tell him or her how much you care and how much you love spending every second together.
Image titled Hug Step 73
Fall into each other. Hug the person you love for as long as you want to.
Males: Carefully sliding both your hands down from her shoulders, put them on her waist and slide them around her lower back. Put your head on her shoulder and press her towards you for as long as you like.
If you want to, you can give her a small massage with your hands, and try to warm her.
You can also lift her in the air and shift her weight towards you. Girls especially love this one.
When you separate, you can look into your lover's eyes, smile genuinely and, if the situation is fitting, kiss her like you mean it.
Females: Extend your arms toward him and wrap them around his neck and shoulders. Lean as close as possible and press your torso against his.
In situations of extreme intimacy, interlocking your leg in his is appropriate.
Avoid holding your arms below his shoulders and embracing too tightly, even if you're about the same height as he is.

Method
4
Edit
Hugging a Family Member
Image titled Hug Step 81
Walk over to your family member. Approach your family member with kind feelings. Obviously, the feelings won't be the same as what you'd feel for a crush, a lover or a close friend (unless you and your family members are also friends).
Image titled Hug Step 92
Embrace your family member. Continuing to talk while hugging is okay.
Where you place your hands is not important because the person you're hugging won't think it over too much.
Press gently. You don't necessarily have to have hard contact.
Stroke your hands quickly across the top of the other person's back. Smile when you let go.
Method
5
Edit
Tips that Apply to Any Kind of Hug
Image titled Hug Step 101
Hug only when the person you want to hug extends his or her arms. If the person doesn't look like he or she is preparing to hug you, then you may want to back off.
Image titled Hug Step 112
Be welcoming when you hug. If either of you requested the hug, then make the person you're hugging feel safe. Act as though the two of you are the only people who matter at the moment.
Image titled Hug Step 123
Avoid hugging the person too tightly. The best way to judge how tightly or loosely to hug is to let whomever you're hugging indicate what they want by how hard they squeeze. If they are soft, be soft back; if they like bear hugs and squeeze tightly, hug back the same way.
Image titled Hug Step 134
Hold the hug for a moment before letting go. A hug is a powerful way to communicate that you care for another person, as it can feel great and improve the other person's mood. Ending the hug too early may make both of you feel awkward.
Image titled Hug Step 145
Know when to give a long, loving hug, especially if the person is feeling upset or down. If you feel comfortable, go along with it and hug until the other person lets go or loosens his or her hold.
EditVideo

EditTips
Tip for guys- girls especially love it when you come up from behind an wrap your arms round their waist and hug them tight (not too tight though!).
Girls like tight hugs so be sure to squeeze them a little, not too tight though!
Gently wrap your arms around her neck. If she is tall, then under their arms, but light your head on her chest. Make it romantic but not too romantic.
Hugging a lover should last at least a few seconds longer than platonic hugs
Smile the whole time. Smiling is a great way to show that you care about that person, and not just hugging random people for the sake of it. But don't be all grinning-like, and over-cheery. Be natural, a curve of the lips is more than enough.
Smile, be warm and inviting if you're going to hug your crush.
In a "manly hug", it is common to pat twice on the back before disengaging.
A good approach in any relationship is to walk up to the person from a few feet away with your arms open.
Unless you've hugged the person before, don't hug without asking first. In addition, use your best judgment in choosing when and where to hug someone. In certain situations you might be embarrassed to be seen hugging someone else.
If you're a guy and you're going for a more intimate hug, place your head on her shoulder and kiss her neck gently.

EditWarnings
Don't hug someone if you're sweaty or stinky. Also, make sure that you have fresh breath before initiating close contact.
Avoid a hug with a running start unless the person being hugged is aware you are about to give an embrace. The last thing you want to do is to knock the person over.
If you want to look into their eyes as you hug, gently place your arms around the back of their neck. Not too tightly, or else you will hurt them.