In addition to making places look ugly, litter presents a threat to wildlife and public health. Pitching in and cleaning up some trash is an easy way for anyone to help out. Read this useful article to find out how you can help!
Ad 

 
EditSteps
Image titled Pick up Litter Step 11
Stop littering yourself. You have no entitlement to litter. The reason there is so much trash around is because many other people thought the same way. Just be on the lookout for trash bins, and be willing to hold on to your trash for a little while. When on the road, make sure items in the back of your truck are secure and nothing can blow out. Keep your truck bed clean and free of loose litter. If you own a business, keep your parking lot and the area around your dumpsters clean. Have trash containers available for customers. Keep them emptied so trash will not blow out of the containers. On windy days, litter can travel a long way from the litter source.

Image titled Pick up Litter Step 22
Buy food items with less packaging and eat less processed or manufactured food. Pack your own lunch in containers that can be reused. Drink water or other beverages from your own container. Spend money on some really wonderful tasting fruit rather than a packaged snack or dessert.
Image titled Pick up Litter Step 33
Spread the word to friends and relatives about why littering is so bad. Don't hand out fliers because those could become litter themselves! Create awareness by writing letters to the editors of newspapers. Talk "Trash" and emphasize how litter mars the beauty of the cities and countryside. Encourage citizens to work together and clean up the environment.
Image titled Pick up Litter Step 44
Start cleaning up. This can be done solo, with friends or in an organized group. Once you get started, you will not want to quit. Getting started is the hardest part. Don't be embarrassed to do it alone. Believe me, it will make you feel really good about yourself. Pick up litter while getting your walking exercise. A lot of people think picking up litter is disgusting and degrading. Litter is what is disgusting and degrading. If everyone would do a little to keep the environment clean, it would make a world of difference. Bring a plastic bag with you on trips, outings and walks.
Image titled Pick up Litter Step 55
If solo: You can pick up litter on the way to work or school if you don't drive.' You may feel embarrassed if this is uncommon in your area. But you will eventually inspire others. You could occasionally take different routes for variety and to see if your actions have taken root with others.'Unless you have become friendly with the owners of private properties, only pick up what is on sidewalks of houses. Even if the owners or tenants are messy, it is private property. Be aware that even just picking up litter from sidewalks may only encourage the owners or tenants to continue or possibly increase their littering. You could strike up a friendly conversation and gently but firmly educate owners and tenants about the consequences of littering. Do not become self-righteous, pushy or angry -- you will lose points for sure. Try some humor instead.

 
Image titled Pick up Litter Step 66
If with others: gather up a group of friends for an informal litter picking party. Have participants meet somewhere afterward for a meal or have all bring food for a potluck afterward at your home.
Image titled Pick up Litter Step 77
Suggest to a group you belong to, that cleaning up area on an afternoon might be a worthwhile community service activity. Pick an area near a restroom if possible. Keep the area of the project small or the time frame with in an hour. Otherwise people may become soured about how much time or work it took. Have a contest to see who can pick up the the largest number of pieces or the most pounds of trash. Or the most unusual trash. The winner gets a free beverage, cloth bag, or other prize. (See if a local merchant will donate a prize.)