Simple, taken for granted gestures have the potential to say a lot about you. The perfect handshake exudes confidence and personality, while a sub-par performance may leave your personality in doubt. This short how-to explains the subtle art of the handshake.
EditSteps
Image titled Shake Hands Step 11
Extend your right hand toward the intended recipient of your handshake.
Your palm should be perpendicular to the ground.

Image titled Shake Hands Step 22
Hold your arm so that it is parallel to the ground, ensuring that your thumb points upward.
Image titled Shake Hands Step 33
When the recipient of your gesture offers his or her hand, engage this completely with your own so that the crotches of your hands touch.
Image titled Shake Hands Step 44
Give their hand a firm yet gentle squeeze, simultaneously administering one downward shake that travels about 3/4 inch (2 cm).
Image titled Shake Hands Step 55
Let go of their hand.

 
Image titled Shake Hands Step 66
Refrain from wiping your hand on a pant leg, towel, or other nearby accessory.
Pretend the other person's hand is a bird. Grip it hard enough so the bird can't move, but not so hard as to crush it.
Make friendly eye contact. You should be thinking about how happy you are to meet the person or to see an old friend, your feelings should show in your eyes and be communicated with a sincere verbal greeting.
Don't forget the gentle squeeze part, or you will be giving a handshake that is too loose.
Just one shake is sufficient, unless you live in a culture/country where longer pumping is the norm.
There are several variations of the handshake used by different subgroups:
Jock shake: starting the shake with the hand held far out to the side
TV host shake: offering the hand palm up to the other person.
Sissy shake: offering the hand palm down as though expecting the back of the hand to be kissed.
60s/Black Power shake: angling the fingers up and hooking thumbs.
High Five: slapping the upraised ventral surface of the other person's hand.