Almost anybody can shoot a bow, but not many people can shoot a bow quickly and accurately.
EditSteps
Image titled Shoot a Bow Accurately Step 11
Before you shoot the bow, draw it back ten times an hour until you can easily pull back a 40 or 45 pound draw (most state hunting minimums). This is so the arrow has the power to fly a medium distance straight.

Image titled Shoot a Bow Accurately Step 22
When you are ready to shoot, make sure you have arrows of the correct length (arrow should stick out an inch past the arrow rest at full draw) and grain. You must also have the correct field tips. Make sure they are the same grain as the broad tips you wish to use, so when you sight it in practicing with your field tips, it won't be off when you use a broad head to kill what you are hunting.
Image titled Shoot a Bow Accurately Step 33
Draw back, steady your aim, and let the arrow fly. Ha! I wish it was that easy, but sadly, it's not. First, you must have your peep sight adjusted. If you are using a compound bow, then you should take to a specialist, because if you mess around with it and cut even the slightest strand of the string that you working on, it will rip apart right away, or it will surely break within the next 5-10 shots. Professionals are trained to detect whether they cut something they shouldn't have before they even draw back.
Image titled Shoot a Bow Accurately Step 44
The big thing you must do, is draw back and stick your thumb straight out, like your giving someone a thumbs up, and turn it sideways until you can put it behind your neck, then tuck your chin in, as if you were nodding your head, until the tip of your nose on the side nearest to the string actually touches the string. Then close the away eye and look through your peep sight and at the pin. Put the end of it over the target and shoot, but hold the bow without moving at all. Except for letting go of the string, of course.
Make sure you have the right grain arrows and tips.
Treat the bow as an extension of your arm.
If you're using a long or curve bow, keep both eyes open. Your shot will be more accurate.
Have at least a sixty pound draw.
Try tilting the bow when you aim and shoot it helps you get a more accurate shot.