Although mostly a relic of the past, the sword and the art of sword-fighting still fascinates and inspires. But this is not a fantastical art. The main point is to win your fight, or at least survive to fight another day. Here are some key concepts in succeeding:


Please note: Reading this article will not make you an expert swordsman. While this article attempts to sum up the basics of swordsmanship, the many intricacies of handling the sword cannot be taught on paper, computer screen, video, or WikiHow article. If you are truly interested in learning, find a local martial arts studio, fencing school, SCA chapter - whatever suits your fancy - and leave your training to an expert teacher. Remember things will be different from style to style and school to school and sword to sword some things in this article may not apply to you.
EditSteps
1
Be aware of your melee scenario. Situational awareness is key to winning the fight. Your mind needs to not only be aware that you need to prepare to fight, but also to quickly take in your surroundings and calculate how to turn the environment to your advantage. If you are taken by surprise, you may be beaten before you had a chance to draw your sword.
Trust your "uh-oh" gut feelings. Having a feeling that something is just not right? That you are being watched? It is just too quiet, or something is out of place, or you hear something but not sure what? Honor your intuition; it may well save your life.
Be aware of threats. If you are not aware of attackers, you are already at a disadvantage. This includes being observant of odd or suspicious behavior, awareness of your surroundings, and often just your "gut feeling".
Be aware of your fighting situation. A fight by two thugs in a darkened alley is different from a tournament fight. A tournament fight is controlled and done with a code of honor. If you are attacked "on the street" (for some reason) you are likely fighting for your life, and should not hold back on "dishonorable" tactics such as kicking, throwing sand in an opponent's eyes, or trickery.

Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 42
Assess your melee environment. Every sword fight takes place somewhere. Awareness of where you are can help access possible disadvantages, and be able to turn the physical environment to your advantage. If you can maneuver yourself so that you can attack and/or protect yourself more effectively--prepare an ambush, force your opponent against a dead end, hide behind a boulder--you are more likely to win. Some sample environmental elements to consider:
Bright sunlight can blind, if it is at the right angle and the right blindness. Forcing your opponent to have the sun in his or her eyes may make it much harder to see you.
Dark environments can conceal, either you or your opponent.
Forests have a host of opportunities for concealment. Trees makes it difficult or impossible to execute massed defenses such as "shield walls" or offenses like typical battlefield formations.
Natural barriers such as cliffs, ocean, or walls cut off mobility and escape routes.
Swordfighters (especially in armor) do not typically do well in mud, marshy areas, ice, or deep, soft snow.
Battlefields require acting as part of a team, even more than an as individual. You will depend on the people around your for survival, and to act rashly alone means likely death for you and your comrades.
Urban environments typically encompass enclosed spaces, such as rooms or streets.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 13
Draw your sword before you engage. A trained sword swing takes a fraction of a second, so drawing your sword can take precious time. Also, your sword is of minimal value hanging in its sheath.
On the other hand, if your sword and scabbard are suitable for a quick draw, and you practice, this can be a great surprise attack. It can also intimidate by showing you are a highly trained fighter.
This is especially applicable to the Japanese sword which has styles for attacking people while drawing the blade called Iaido and Batto-jutsu.
4
Relax! The natural reaction to sword combat is panic. However, if you are tight, in a frazzled state of mind you cannot act with speed, control, or mental clarity. This can be fatal. With practice, you will learn to achieve a state of calm concentration in the midst of danger. Your mind will learn to focus on what is.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 35
Balance, keep your body balanced so you can strike or parry without being hit. Always have your feet shoulder wide and when you move, move so your legs spread apart. Never have your feet close to each other. Hold your sword so you can handle it with ease. Watch your opponent's movements and learn when he moves in to attack and launch a preemptive strike (counter).Be quick. When you parry you keep the blade close to you so you don't stretch out to block and always try to counter your opponents attack. Your footing and proper foot placement is key for balance. The more of the sole of your foot touches the ground the more grounded you are giving you greater strength in your attacks. To keep your balance try to slide your feet rather then lift them up and stepping. Leaning forward lifting up your heel also reduces your grounding so be cautious with how your feet are placed and used during each strike because you give great opportunity for your opponent to knock you over. Keep your posture straight and your chest and torso forward which will keep you from losing your balance during your swings and allows you to avoid with a simple twist any blows with ease rather then having your torso turned sideways locking yourself to only be able to evade an attack in only one direction.

 
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 56
Engage with care. If you charge in recklessly, especially against a trained fighter, he may just wait and let you impale yourself on his sword. By engaging carefully, you are able to maintain control and focus at all times. This also will allow your best defense which most of the time is just sidestepping (or side sliding) your opponents attack potentially saving your life and allowing the opening for your winning blow. Dodging works extremely well in an open space or if you are quick, an indoor room.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 67
Have a strong defense. Missing just one block or parry can be fatal, so protect yourself well. Maintain your sword in a position that runs from the bottom of your torso to the top of your head. This is a middle position, suitable for any skill level, that will enable you to respond to an attack with reasonable speed, and also gives you many angles for your own strikes.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 78
Keep your weapon ready. Generally, your sword should be extended a comfortable distance away from your body, and toward your opponent's throat, or perhaps his eye. This is referred to as putting him "on point". It serves as a ward against an opponent (who must, after all, get through your sword first), and can be quite intimidating, especially to an inexperienced fighter.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 89
Keep your elbows bent, and close to your body. An inexperienced fighter tends to stretch out his arms in order to keep his opponent further off, but this will hurt your ability to thrust and parry quickly. Extend your sword towards your opponent, not your arms.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 910
Make the first strike count. Although a skilled fighter can keep up combat for extended periods, a real sword fight is quite often determined by the first blow--often decided in less than 30 seconds. Be sure of your attack, for it is likely that if you miss with your first strike, your opponent will take advantage, and end the fight himself with a fatal blow.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 1011
Find and maintain a distance based on a balance of your reach and your opponent. One's "reach" is the weapon plus the length of the sword swing. A long arm with a short sword could equal the reach of a shorter arm and a long sword. What is comfortable will be based on a number of factors: your height, sword length, sword style, and fighting style all affect your proper distance.
If you have a shorter "reach", generally get in close and stay within his or her guard. Do not let him or her push you away. An opponent with longer reach will not be as easily able to get a good swing in, and you can usually swing faster than a person with a longer "reach".
If you are using a longer sword, keep your distance. A longer sword makes it possible to keep the opponent farther away and thus less likely to make contact.
If about the same, generally stay about where it would only take one large step forward to attack.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 1112
Remain calm and confident. Poise can decide a fight as surely as the sword, and is an effective stratagem. If you are nervous or frightened, your opponent may try to take advantage of your lack of confidence and attempt to goad you into making a fatal mistake. Cool warriors tend to make others wary, unsettled, and ideally fearful.
You can still stay calm, but prefer to show aggressiveness and intimidate your opponent instead, or even pretend to be scared, or even make him or her laugh in the hope of lulling your enemy into making a fatal error.
Each strength has a weakness. For example, a tall fighter may have longer reach--but it may take longer to throw a shot, and height is a disadvantage in an area with a low ceiling height.
Each weakness may have a strength. An inexperienced fighter is also one that is difficult to predict.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 1213
Once the fight begins, find the flow of battle and attempt to control it. This is just a fancy way of summing everything else in this article up in one sentence but its very important in it's own right too. If you succeed in finding the flow and controlling it you have a very good chance of almost directly influencing the entire fight directly through you actions. It is a difficult concept to grasp but try the next time you spar during practice.
Find the patterns and flow from one move to the next and try to control your opponent. Generally fighters fall into strikes, defenses, and tactics that are most familiar and comfortable to them. It takes many years and lots of practice to accomplish this but if you do this then the battle is already half yours.
Image titled Win a Swordfight Step 1314
Drop the dramatics. Most sword fights are won with simple, well timed and well placed blows and parries. Flashy elaborate moves are generally best left to martial arts movies. There are practical purposes to certain showy maneuvers in the right situation in the right opportunity. However, unless you are an expert you are more likely to leave yourself open for an embarrassing defeat. For instance, do not spin in a circle. It may look cinema-ready but leaves your hard-to-defend back open to blows.
One possible useful purpose: intimidation. Showing a less experienced fighter that you are able to easily pull off fancy maneuvers can crack the other person's confidence. Making the opponent question his or her abilities against you is a huge psychological win.
Another good tactic: distraction. If your opponent is busy watching you dance around, that might be the time you need to find an opening in the defense.

Accuracy is more vital than power.
Remember that every part of your sword is a weapon, including the point, each edge, the handguard, and the pommel. Along with this your body is a weapon and anything around you can be a weapon. There is no reason a sword fight should be restricted to your blade. Use whatever you can to win.
If possible, know beforehand the weapon your opponent is using. If going against an opponent with a smaller faster sword, do not let its appearance fool you. A weapon like that probably has a moderate amount of bend and specializes in squeezing in between openings. On the other hand, If your opponent is using a large heavy sword, he/she is probably planning to end the fight with one or two strikes. Stay as far away from your opponent as possible and wait for him/her to tire.
Be aware of the terrain around you and use it to your advantage. Sending an opponent tumbling backwards over an obstacle behind him/her will surely help. Also, placing your back to the sun can cause your enemy to be momentarily blinded, thus opening him/her up to a fatal strike.
Take good care of your equipment. Well-maintained weapons and armor are far less likely to let you down when it matters most.
If at all possible, avoid fighting more than one person. If you must fight many opponents, try to maneuver them so that they interfere with each other, and thus enable you to deal with each one individually.
Never dodge like a maniac. Look to where your opponent is aiming, and move as little as possible. If he lunges and you sidestep you will most likely have a clear shot. Take it. And don't be afraid to carry an off hand sword. Its not cheating, just practical.
Positioning of the body is important. Keep your body perpendicular and the shoulder of your sword arm pointed toward your opponent (like fencers do). This makes your torso a smaller target and will protect many of your vital organs.
Training is vital. If you practice very hard, perhaps 10% of what you know will be available to you during combat. You must be able to act instinctively, without thought. Basic techniques lend themselves well to this, which is why they are called 'basics'. Be sure to train yourself constantly in these essentials, for much of the time, they will be the only things you have to fall back on. It generally takes about two months to learn a technique fully, but only one month to lose it.
Conserve your energy. It is well-known among veterans that a fight to the death takes an incredible amount of effort, so don't waste your time with fancy maneuvers or unnecessary motion. Your survival may depend on this.